The Queen's messages to those celebrating their 90th birthdays on 21 April
On this shared occasion, I send my warm congratulations to you all
Christmas Broadcast 2006
The birth of a baby brings great happiness - but then the business of growing up begins.
The Queen's Christmas Broadcast in 2006 focused on understanding between faiths and generations.
The broadcast was filmed in Southwark Cathedral in London where Her Majesty met schoolchildren working on a Nativity collage.
I have lived long enough to know that things never remain quite the same for very long.
One of the things that has not changed all that much for me is the celebration of Christmas.
It remains a time when I try to put aside the anxieties of the moment and remember that Christ was born to bring peace and tolerance to a troubled world.
The birth of Jesus naturally turns our thoughts to all new-born children and what the future holds for them.
The birth of a baby brings great happiness - but then the business of growing up begins.
It is a process that starts within the protection and care of parents and other members of the family - including the older generation.
As with any team, there is strength in combination: what grandparent has not wished for the best possible upbringing for their grandchildren or felt an enormous sense of pride at their achievements?But the pressures of modern life sometimes seem to be weakening the links which have traditionally kept us together as families and communities.
As children grow up and develop their own sense of confidence and independence in the ever-changing technological environment, there is always the danger of a real divide opening up between young and old, based on unfamiliarity, ignorance or misunderstanding.
It is worth bearing in mind that all of our faith communities encourage the bridging of that divide.
The wisdom and experience of the great religions point to the need to nurture and guide the young, and to encourage respect for the elderly.
Christ himself told his disciples to let the children come to him, and Saint Paul reminded parents to be gentle with their children, and children to appreciate their parents.
The scriptures and traditions of the other faiths enshrine the same fundamental guidance.
It is very easy to concentrate on the differences between the religious faiths and to forget what they have in common - people of different faiths are bound together by the need to help the younger generation to become considerate and active citizens.
And there is another cause for hope that we can do better in the future at bridging the generation gap.
As older people remain more active for longer, the opportunities to look for new ways to bring young and old together are multiplying.
As I look back on these past twelve months, marked in particular for me by the very generous response to my eightieth birthday, I especially value the opportunities I have had to meet young people.
I am impressed by their energy and vitality, and by their ambition to learn and to travel.
It makes me wonder what contribution older people can make to help them realise their ambitions.
I am reminded of a lady of about my age who was asked by an earnest, little grand-daughter the other day "Granny, can you remember the Stone Age?"
Whilst that may be going a bit far, the older generation are able to give a sense of context as well as the wisdom of experience which can be invaluable.
Such advice and comfort are probably needed more often than younger people admit or older people recognise.
I hope that this is something that all of us, young or old, can reflect on at this special time of year.
For Christians, Christmas marks the birth of our Saviour, but it is also a wonderful occasion to bring the generations together in a shared festival of peace, tolerance and goodwill.
A speech by The Queen at the Sydney Opera House
It is my duty to seek to remain true to the interests of Australia and all Australians as we enter the twenty-first century.
In March 2000 The Queen paid her thirteenth visit to Australia.
It followed a referendum in November 1999 in which a majority of the Australian public voted to retain The Queen as Head of State.
The Queen reflects on the referendum in the first speech of her tour, made on 20 March at Sydney Opera House.
Mr.
Prime Minister, Mr. Premier, Mr. Beazley, Ladies and Gentlemen.
I am delighted to be back in Australia after eight years.
I can think of no better way to begin this two-week visit this morning than at the Sydney Opera House, recognised and acknowledged everywhere as a symbol of Australia's determination to make its mark in the world as such a lively, distinctive and innovative nation.
I am grateful to those of you who have come here today for this lunch.
Prince Philip and I have over the years deeply appreciated the warmth and generosity shown to us by Australians in every corner of the world.
Your welcome today has been no exception.
This year will take us to New South Wales, Victoria, Tasmania and Western Australia, together with visits to Canberra in the ACT as well as Alice Springs in the Northern Territory.
Next year Prince Philip and I are much looking forward to visiting Queensland and South Australia at the time of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting to be held in Brisbane.
We are starting the programme in the big cities, but I am glad that our tour this year includes a number of rural and regional areas.
We are particularly looking forward to meeting people from these more remote locations who for generations have been such a distinct and enduring part of the Australian way of life.
This is my thirteenth visit to Australia and I have seen the Australian economy change and develop dramatically since those early days of the 1950s.
Compared to some of those earlier tours the nation is enjoying a new era of prosperity.
Australia has weathered the Asian financial crisis that afflicted so many of its neighbours and now has one of the fastest-growing economies in the developed world.
Information technology and the dot-com world are changing our lives, our work and the way we interact within and between countries - and will do so increasingly in the future.
There is clearly a sense of dynamism and confidence around.
I know that the fairness and decency for which this country is rightly renowned will mean that continued efforts are made to ensure that this prosperity touches all Australians.
It remains a sad fact of life that many indigenous Australians face a legacy of economic and social disadvantage.
Others, particularly from some rural areas, feel left behind.
The country's response in trying to find ways of helping all Australians to share in the country's growing wealth will require patience, determination and goodwill from all members of the community.
Since I was last here, Australia has also enhanced its reputation as an active and responsible partner in world affairs.
As Head of the Commonwealth may I pay tribute to the energetic role which Australia continues to play in that organisation.
The Commonwealth has always been a global network and is being given new relevance as the communications revolution touches us all.
The next Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting in Brisbane will be a good opportunity to take forward this co-operation.
All Australians can be enormously proud of this country's contribution to peacekeeping in Papua New Guinea and especially in East Timor.
The success of this INTERFET Mission has owed much to the leadership of General Cosgrove and to the courage and dedication of the many men and women from the Services, the Police and other civilian organisations who have so rightly earned our admiration and respect.
Australia's leadership in helping the people of East Timor has won wide acclaim.
As we look back over the last year it has also been one of extraordinary Australian sporting achievement.
Advance Australia Fair was played on the sports fields of the world more often in 1999 than perhaps any other year.
It was a great personal pleasure to present the Rugby World Cup to John Eales in Cardiff in November last year, which complemented Australian successes in so many other men's and women's sports - from cricket to tennis, from netball to hockey and even, I am told, to aerial freestyle skiing.
This extraordinary run of national success says much about the Australian character.
Later this year there will be another occasion for the world to see how much this prowess at sport is part of the Australian identity.
Tomorrow I shall be visiting Homebush Bay.
The Olympics and Paralympics will be an opportunity for Australia's sportsmen and women again to demonstrate to the world their natural talent for sport.
The Games will also present an even greater challenge and opportunity - to show modern Australia to the world, an Australia that is culturally diverse and dynamic, intellectually vibrant, economically strong, with a real sense of community and with a natural instinct for hospitality.
In January next year Australia will mark the centenary of Federation and one hundred years of nationhood.
It will be a time of justified celebration, but I hope it will also be a time of pause and quiet reflection.
At that time I shall reflect - perhaps with that hint of surprise which comes with age - that my formal commitment to Australia will have spanned almost precisely half of this country's life as a federated nation.
You can understand therefore that it was with the closest interest that I followed the debate leading up to the referendum held last year on the proposal to amend the Constitution.
I have always made it clear that the future of the monarchy in Australia is an issue for you, the Australian people, and you alone to decide by democratic and constitutional means.
It should not be otherwise.
As I said at the time, I respect and accept the outcome of the referendum.
In the light of the result last November, I shall continue faithfully to serve as Queen of Australia under the Constitution to the very best of my ability, as I have tried to do for these past forty-eight years.
It is my duty to seek to remain true to the interests of Australia and all Australians as we enter the twenty-first century.
That is my duty.
It is also my privilege and my pleasure.
I cannot forget that I was on my way to Australia when my father died.
Since then and since I first stepped ashore here in Sydney in February 1954 I have felt part of this rugged, honest, creative land.
I have shared in the joys and the sorrows, the challenges and the changes that have shaped this country's history over these past fifty years.
But we must look forward as well as back.
Australia has always been a country on the move and will go on being so - it is not for nothing that the anthem is 'Advance Australia Fair'.
The Christmas Broadcast 2017
In the wake of the Manchester terror attacks and the Grenfell Tower fire, The Queen reflects on the idea of homeWe think of our homes as places of warmth, familiarity and love; of shared stories and memories, which is perhaps why at this time of year so many return to where they grew up.
There is a timeless simplicity to the pull of homeSixty years ago today, I spoke about the speed of technological change, in what was my first televised Christmas broadcast.
At the time, it felt like a landmark:
	 	"Television has made it possible for many of you to see me in your homes on Christmas Day.
My own family often gather round to watch television as they are at this moment, and that is how I imagine you now."
Six decades on, the presenter of that broadcast has 'evolved' somewhat, as has the technology she described.
Back then, who could have imagined that people would one day be following this Christmas message on laptops and mobile phones?
But I'm also struck by something that hasn't changed.
That, whatever the technology, many of you will be watching or listening to this at home.
We think of our homes as places of warmth, familiarity and love; of shared stories and memories, which is perhaps why at this time of year so many return to where they grew up.
There is a timeless simplicity to the pull of home.
For many, the idea of “home” reaches beyond a physical building – to a home town or city.
This Christmas, I think of London and Manchester, whose powerful identities shone through over the past twelve months in the face of appalling attacks.
In Manchester, those targeted included children who had gone to see their favourite singer.
A few days after the bombing, I had the privilege of meeting some of the young survivors and their parents.
I describe that hospital visit as a “privilege” because the patients I met were an example to us all, showing extraordinary bravery and resilience.
Indeed, many of those who survived the attack came together just days later for a benefit concert.
It was a powerful reclaiming of the ground, and of the city those young people call home.
We expect our homes to be a place of safety – “sanctuary” even – which makes it all the more shocking when the comfort they provide is shattered.
A few weeks ago, The Prince of Wales visited the Caribbean in the aftermath of hurricanes that destroyed entire communities.
And here in London, who can forget the sheer awfulness of the Grenfell Tower fire?
Our thoughts and prayers are with all those who died and those who lost so much; and we are indebted to members of the emergency services who risked their own lives, this past year, saving others.
Many of them, of course, will not be at home today because they are working, to protect us.
Reflecting on these events makes me grateful for the blessings of home and family, and in particular for 70 years of marriage.
I don’t know that anyone had invented the term “platinum” for a 70th wedding anniversary when I was born.
You weren’t expected to be around that long.
Even Prince Philip has decided it’s time to slow down a little – having, as he economically put it, “done his bit”.
But I know his support and unique sense of humour will remain as strong as ever, as we enjoy spending time this Christmas with our family and look forward to welcoming new members into it next year.
In 2018 I will open my home to a different type of family: the leaders of the fifty-two nations of the Commonwealth, as they gather in the UK for a summit.
The Commonwealth has an inspiring way of bringing people together, be it through the Commonwealth Games – which begins in a few months’ time on Australia’s Gold Coast – or through bodies like the Commonwealth Youth Orchestra & Choir: a reminder of how truly vibrant this international family is.

Centenary of Alberta joining Confederation, Alberta Legislature, Canada, 24 May 2005
While all Albertans — and all Canadians — value this history as a colourful account of the past, we also view it as a foundation for our present and future.
Prince Philip and I are very pleased to be back in Alberta in this Centennial year as you celebrate not only your historic past, but also the dynamism of your community today as well as the great opportunities that lie ahead.
When looking back on the story of Alberta, we see it extend well before 1905.
It is indeed the story of Canada.
Your First Nations peoples inhabited the prairies over ten thousand years ago, living in harmony with nature - then as they do now.
By the 1800's, these first citizens, along with the Métis, were joined by explorers, homesteaders, and railway workers from all over the world.
They had a dream to build homes in a land where freedom reigned.
They created a spirit of belonging to a bountiful country under the principles of "peace, order, and good government" and the unifying influence of the Crown.
It is a fitting homage to these ancestors that your motto is Fortis et Liber...Strong and Free.
I am pleased to learn that the provincial government is marking this milestone year with its Centennial Legacy Program.
It is investing in parks, historical sites and recreational facilities all across Alberta.
These exciting projects reflect the importance that Albertans place on your excellent quality of life, your positive economic outlook, and your success in agriculture, energy and industry.
They also reflect the gratitude you feel towards generations of elders and forebears whose hard work built the Alberta of today.
Among the early settlers who came here so many decades ago to build a new life, there were thousands of families with children who were themselves destined to become the nation builders of the future.
Today I am speaking on air across the province, including schools in communities from Lethbridge to Fort Vermillion, from Wainwright to Grande Cache.
Just half an hour ago, at the provincial museum, now called The Royal Alberta Museum, I enjoyed the opportunity to meet some of the young people of Alberta who were touring that showcase of living heritage.
I hope that all young people in the province will take the opportunity of the Centennial to learn of the way in which their own communities have flourished over the last hundred years.
While all Albertans — and all Canadians — value this history as a colourful account of the past, we also view it as a foundation for our present and future.
During this visit, as we honour the spirit of those who built this great nation, it is timely to remind ourselves that we can indeed make a difference for those who will in turn come after us.
If we strive, in our own lives and our own way, to leave the world around us a little better than we have found it and to maintain the highest standards in everything we do, we can legitimately take pride in our contribution.
During a previous visit 32 years ago I said that "... I want the Crown in Canada to represent everything that is best and most admired in the Canadian ideal.
I will continue to do my best to make it so during my lifetime, and I hope you will all continue to give me your help in this task."
I would like to repeat those words today as, together, we continue to build a country that remains the envy of the world.
An address by The Queen to Parliament, 2012
We are reminded here of our past, of the continuity of our national story and the virtues of resilience, ingenuity and tolerance which created it.
My Lords and Members of the House of Commons,I am most grateful for your Loyal Addresses and the generous words of the Lord Speaker and Mr. Speaker.
This great institution has been at the heart of the country and the lives of our people throughout its history.
As Parliamentarians, you share with your forebears a fundamental role in the laws and decisions of your own age.
Parliament has survived as an unshakeable cornerstone of our constitution and our way of life.
History links monarchs and Parliament, a connecting thread from one period to the next.
So, in an era when the regular, worthy rhythm of life is less eye-catching than doing something extraordinary, I am reassured that I am merely the second Sovereign to celebrate a Diamond Jubilee.
As today, it was my privilege to address you during my Silver and Golden Jubilees.
Many of you were present ten years ago and some of you will recall the occasion in 1977.
Since my Accession, I have been a regular visitor to the Palace of Westminster and, at the last count, have had the pleasurable duty of treating with twelve Prime Ministers.
Over such a period, one can observe that the experience of venerable old age can be a mighty guide but not a prerequisite for success in public office.
I am therefore very pleased to be addressing many younger Parliamentarians and also those bringing such a wide range of background and experience to your vital, national work.
During these years as your Queen, the support of my family has, across the generations, been beyond measure.
Prince Philip is, I believe, well-known for declining compliments of any kind.
But throughout he has been a constant strength and guide.
He and I are very proud and grateful that The Prince of Wales and other members of our family are travelling on my behalf in this Diamond Jubilee year to visit all the Commonwealth Realms and a number of other Commonwealth countries.
These overseas tours are a reminder of our close affinity with the Commonwealth, encompassing about one-third of the world’s population.
My own association with the Commonwealth has taught me that the most important contact between nations is usually contact between its peoples.
An organisation dedicated to certain values, the Commonwealth has flourished and grown by successfully promoting and protecting that contact.
At home, Prince Philip and I will be visiting towns and cities up and down the land.
It is my sincere hope that the Diamond Jubilee will be an opportunity for people to come together in a spirit of neighbourliness and celebration of their own communities.
We also hope to celebrate the professional and voluntary service given by millions of people across the country who are working for the public good.
They are a source of vital support to the welfare and wellbeing of others, often unseen or overlooked.
And as we reflect upon public service, let us again be mindful of the remarkable sacrifice and courage of our Armed Forces.
Much may indeed have changed these past sixty years but the valour of those who risk their lives for the defence and freedom of us all remains undimmed.
The happy relationship I have enjoyed with Parliament has extended well beyond the more than three and a half thousand Bills I have signed into law.
I am therefore very touched by the magnificent gift before me, generously subscribed by many of you.
Should this beautiful window cause just a little extra colour to shine down upon this ancient place, I should gladly settle for that.
Ceremony for the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders of Canada, 10 October 2002
I am happy to be in Hamilton today in order to present new Colours and to visit my Canadian Argylls.
Commanding Officer, Officers, Warrant Officers, Non Commissioned Officers and members of the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders of Canada (Princess Louise's).In this year of my Golden Jubilee I am happy to be in Hamilton today in order to present new Colours and to visit my Canadian Argylls.
In committing these new Colours into your care I know that those of you on parade today will continue to maintain and honour the values and traditions of successive generations of Canadian Argylls who have earned, through sacrifice at places such as Vimy Ridge and Hill 195, the Battle Honours emblazoned upon the Regimental Colour I have presented today.
I am pleased to note the presence here of so many veterans of the 1st Battalion.
Au cours des quarante-trois années qui ont suivi ma dernière presentation des drapeaux aux Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders of Canada, les membres du Régiment ont continué à promouvoir la cause de la paix sous le drapeau national du Canada qui forme la base des couleurs présenteés aujourd'hui.
Plusieurs personnes ont répondu à l'appel afin de servir leurs concitoyens canadiens au pays lors de catastrophes naturelles, et à l'étranger au cours d'opérations de maintien de la paix dans des endroits tels que Chypre, le Moyen-Orient et l'ancienne République de Yougoslavie.
The Regiment has chosen to mark its centennial by building a Commemorative Pavilion in Bayfront Park as its gift to the citizens of Hamilton.
It will be a lasting tribute to those members of the Regiment who have served in war and peace since 1903 - remembering particularly those who gave their lives during two World Wars.
Its location in such a prominent place within the City of Hamilton will provide a continuing link between the Regiment and the city from which it draws its strength.
As your Colonel-in-Chief for the past fifty-two years, I know that the legacy of service that began with the formation of the 91st Highlanders in 1903 is being maintained by my Canadian Argylls serving at home and overseas as the Regiment begins its 100th year of service to Canada and this community.
I sense the pride and dedication that is evident in each and every one of you on parade today.
It is also clear from the large number of citizens who have joined members of the Regimental family here that the Argylls truly are "Hamilton's Highlanders".
Christmas Broadcast 2009
 I am confident that this diverse Commonwealth of nations can strengthen the common bond that transcends politics, religion, race and economic circumstances.
Each year that passes seems to have its own character.
Some leave us with a feeling of satisfaction, others are best forgotten.
2009 was a difficult year for many, in particular those facing the continuing effects of the economic downturn.
I am sure that we have all been affected by events in Afghanistan and saddened by the casualties suffered by our forces serving there.
Our thoughts go out to their relations and friends who have shown immense dignity in the face of great personal loss.
But, we can be proud of the positive contribution that our servicemen and women are making, in conjunction with our allies.
Well over 13,000 soldiers from the United Kingdom, and across the Commonwealth - Canada, Australia, New Zealand and Singapore - are currently serving in Afghanistan.
The debt of gratitude owed to these young men and women, and to their predecessors, is indeed profound.
It is sixty years since the Commonwealth was created and today, with more than a billion of its members under the age of 25, the organisation remains a strong and practical force for good.
Recently I attended the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Trinidad and Tobago and heard how important the Commonwealth is to young people.
New communication technologies allow them to reach out to the wider world and share their experiences and viewpoints.
For many, the practical assistance and networks of the Commonwealth can give skills, lend advice and encourage enterprise.
It is inspiring to learn of some of the work being done by these young people, who bring creativity and innovation to the challenges they face.
It is important to keep discussing issues that concern us all – there can be no more valuable role for our family of nations.
I have been closely associated with the Commonwealth through most of its existence.
The personal and living bond I have enjoyed with leaders, and with people the world over, has always been more important in promoting our unity than symbolism alone.
The Commonwealth is not an organisation with a mission.
It is rather an opportunity for its people to work together to achieve practical solutions to problems.
In many aspects of our lives, whether in sport, the environment, business or culture, the Commonwealth connection remains vivid and enriching.
It is, in lots of ways, the face of the future.
And with continuing support and dedication, I am confident that this diverse Commonwealth of nations can strengthen the common bond that transcends politics, religion, race and economic circumstances.
We know that Christmas is a time for celebration and family reunions; but it is also a time to reflect on what confronts those less fortunate than ourselves, at home and throughout the world.
Christians are taught to love their neighbours, having compassion and concern, and being ready to undertake charity and voluntary work to ease the burden of deprivation and disadvantage.
We may ourselves be confronted by a bewildering array of difficulties and challenges, but we must never cease to work for a better future for ourselves and for others.
Christmas Broadcast 1993
We have indeed become a global village.
The Queen's Christmas Broadcast in 1993 praised the achievements of volunteers working for peace and the relief of others.
I am speaking to you from the Library at Sandringham.
Four generations of my family have enjoyed the quiet and solitude of this library.
It is still a haven of peace even if my grandchildren do their best over Christmas to make it rather more lively!Most of the books on the shelves date from my great-grandfather's time, and their titles reflect the life and events of those days.
Books are one of the ways in which each generation can communicate its history, values and culture to the next.
There are books here about statesmen, explorers, warriors and saints; there are many about war, especially the First World War which ended seventy-five years ago.
Families and loved ones of those who fought in it knew little of the horrors of the trenches, other than from artists' drawings or photographs - often published days or weeks after the event.
Nowadays stories and pictures from all over the world can be gathered up and appear in print within hours.
We have indeed become a global village.
It is no longer possible to plead ignorance about what is going on in far-off parts of the world.
Switch on the television or radio, and the graphic details of distant events are instantly available to us.
Not all the pictures bring gloomy news.
This year has seen significant progress made towards solving some of the world's most difficult problems - the Middle East, for instance, the democratic future of South Africa and, most recently, Northern Ireland.
All too often, though, we find ourselves watching or listening to the sort of news which, as a daily diet, can be almost overwhelming.
It makes us yearn for some good news.
If we can look on the bright side, so much the better, but that does not mean we should shield ourselves from the truth, even if it is unwelcome.
I believe that we should be aware of events which, in the old days, might have passed us by.
But that means facing up to the question of what we can do to use that awareness for the greater good.
The simple answer is, of course, all too little.
But there is another answer.
It is that the more we know, the more we feel responsible, and the more we want to help.
Those involved in international charity work confirm that modern communications have helped to bring them public support and made them more effective.
People are not shunning the added responsibility, but shouldering it.
All of us owe a debt to those volunteers who are out there in the front line, putting our donations to use by looking after the wounded, the hungry and the oppressed.
Much of their work never reaches the headlines or television screens, but their example should inspire us all the same.
We cannot all follow them the whole way, but we can do something to help within our own community - particularly at Christmas, when those without work, or the company of family or friends, feel especially left out.
I am always moved by those words in St. John's Gospel which we hear on Christmas Day - "He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not".
We have only to listen to the news to know the truth of that.
But the Gospel goes on - "But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God".
For all the inhumanity around us, let us be grateful for those who have received him and who go about quietly doing their work and His will without thought of reward or recognition.
They know that there is an eternal truth of much greater significance than our own triumphs and tragedies, and it is embodied by the Child in the Manger.
That is their message of hope.
We can all try to reflect that message of hope in our own lives, in our actions and in our prayers.
If we do, the reflection may light the way for others and help them to read the message too.
We live in the global village, but villages are made up of families.
We, the peoples of the fifty nations of the Commonwealth - more than a quarter of the world's population - have, as members of one of the largest families, a great responsibility.
By working together, we can help the rest of the world become a more humane and happier place.
Visit to Bury St. Edmund's, Suffolk, 17 July 2002
Ipswich, Norwich, and Cambridge have all become centres of excellence in their different ways.
Thank you for your welcome to East Anglia today - a part of Britain I know particularly well.
For generations my family have felt very much at home here.
It is a long time since I was last in Bury St Edmund's itself, so I am especially delighted to return.
Over the last fifty years I have had the good fortune to receive loyal support and generous friendship from people across the region, be it those living in small villages or large towns and cities.
For this I would like to thank you all most warmly.
As I travelled here this morning, I was reminded of the evolving history which has formed these counties, and which gives the whole region the reputation for which it is famed: people with an independence of spirit, a commitment to enterprise, and a tradition of dependability, living against a backdrop of beautiful countryside and priceless heritage.
These admirable qualities, I know, continue to stand you in good stead today.
But these are times of great change and many agencies - voluntary and statutory - are working hard to make sure that whilst conserving the countryside, steps are taken to ensure a prosperous and equally proud future.
Ipswich, Norwich, and Cambridge have all become centres of excellence in their different ways.
New residents, new businesses, and new technologies are welcomed.
Our generation is indebted to those whose work over the years has helped to shape and maintain this beautiful landscape.
The way we look after the countryside affects the lives not only of those who work on the land, but all those living in rural and urban communities.
Our sense of what it is to be British derives as much from the treasured towns, villages and coastline of East Anglia as it does from the great cities like London or Birmingham.
World War II commemorative event, Horse Guards Parade, 10 July 2005
An act of remembrance is an act of honour.
The Second World War ended in Europe in May sixty years ago, but continued until September in the Pacific.
Today we commemorate all those who lived, worked and fought through six long years of unremitting hardship and sacrifice.
We remember also the unswerving support of the people of the Commonwealth, the United States and of all our allies; it was the triumph of this great alliance that saved the world from tyranny.
Those years of sacrifice have not been in vain.
The horror of that conflict inspired the creation of the United Nations, the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation, and the European Union.
Sadly, we cannot claim that the world has been free from war - or terror - for the last sixty years, but in Europe at least we have been faithful to all those who lost their lives in that great struggle with a vigorous determination to build on what unites rather than divides us.
I am sure that this commemoration will encourage those who have lived through these post-war years of peace and prosperity to reflect on the debt they owe to our wartime generation.
It does not surprise me that, during the present, difficult days for London, people turn to the example set by that generation - of resilience, humour, sustained courage, often under conditions of great deprivation.
That example and those memories should be kept alive by younger generations as they in turn strive to keep the peace in our troubled world.
But there is another reason why we must never forget.
An act of remembrance is an act of honour - to those who sacrificed all, who bore the sufferings of war, who had the wisdom to build the peace.
It is a tribute to you the veterans and your loved ones.
Presentation of new standards to the Household Cavalry, 21 May 2003
We as a nation are intensely proud of our armed forces and never more so than in recent weeks.
Colonel Massey, Officers, Warrant Officers, Non-Commissioned Officers and Troopers of the Household Cavalry.
This is always a special moment for me.
It is the sixth time I have presented new standards to the Household Cavalry and I take great pride in the service you have given during the last fifty years, as your predecessors have given to Sovereigns since the Restoration.
This parade gives me the opportunity to express my gratitude to you and to congratulate you on the excellence of today's ceremonial.
This occasion enables me to express my great admiration for the courage, professionalism and distinction of all our servicemen and women engaged so successfully in the recent and continuing operations in Iraq.
We as a nation are intensely proud of our armed forces and never more so than in recent weeks.
Today, at this parade, I mention especially those of D Squadron, The Blues and Royals, some of whom have very recently returned from Iraq and are with us today.
I also express again my condolences to the families and friends of those who lost their lives.
Their memory will never be forgotten.
The Household Cavalry's deployment in Iraq follows a whole range of operational commitments in recent years.
Squadrons and individuals from both Regiments have served at the forefront of the Army's involvement in Bosnia, Kosovo and Macedonia, as well as Sierra Leone and Afghanistan.
These operations are the latest in the long histories of your regiments, represented by the battle honours won by your predecessors, and emblazoned on your Standards and Guidon which I present today.
These recent commitments and past battle honours remind us all of your prowess as fighting soldiers, but you are also known the world over for your ceremonial duties.
Ten years ago I expressed my wish that my two Regiments of Household Cavalry should maintain their traditional and separate identities.
I am pleased to see that you have managed to do this despite the difficulties this has posed.
Reply to the Loyal Addresses by both Houses of Parliament, 30 April 2002
I would like to pay tribute to the work you do in this, the Mother of Parliaments.
My Lords and Members of the House of Commons,You do Prince Philip and me a great honour in inviting us here today.
I am most grateful to have this opportunity to reply to your Loyal Addresses and I thank you both, Lord Chancellor and Mr. Speaker, for your generous words.
It is right that the first major event to mark my Golden Jubilee this summer is here in the Palace of Westminster.
I would like to pay tribute to the work you do in this, the Mother of Parliaments - where you, like so many famous predecessors before you, have assembled to confront the issues of the day, to challenge each other and address differences through debate and discussion, and to play your essential part in guiding this Kingdom through the changing times of the past fifty years.
For if a Jubilee becomes a moment to define an age, then for me we must speak of change - its breadth and accelerating pace over these years.
Since 1952 I have witnessed the transformation of the international landscape through which this country must chart its course, the emergence of the Commonwealth, the growth of the European Union, the end of the Cold War, and now the dark threat of international terrorism.
This has been matched by no less rapid developments at home, in the devolved shape of our nation, in the structure of society, in technology and communications, in our work and in the way we live.
Change has become a constant; managing it has become an expanding discipline.
The way we embrace it defines our future.
It seems to me that this country has advantages to exploit in this exciting challenge.
We in these islands have the benefit of a long and proud history.
This not only gives us a trusted framework of stability and continuity to ease the process of change, but it also tells us what is of lasting value.
Only the passage of time can filter out the ephemeral from the enduring.
And what endure are the characteristics that mark our identity as a nation and the timeless values that guide us.
These values find expression in our national institutions - including the Monarchy and Parliament - institutions which in turn must continue to evolve if they are to provide effective beacons of trust and unity to succeeding generations.
I believe that many of the traditional values etched across our history equip us well for this age of change.
We are a moderate, pragmatic people, more comfortable with practice than theory.
With an off-shore, seafaring tradition we are outward-looking and open-minded, well suited by temperament - and language - to our shrinking world.
We are inventive and creative - think of the record of British inventions over the past fifty years or our present thriving arts scene.
We also take pride in our tradition of fairness and tolerance - the consolidation of our richly multicultural and multifaith society, a major development since 1952, is being achieved remarkably peacefully and with much goodwill.
But there is another tradition in this country which gives me confidence for the future.
That is the tradition of service.
The willingness to "honour one another and seek the common good" transcends social change.
Over these fifty years on visits up and down this country I have seen at first hand and met so many people who are dedicating themselves quietly and selflessly to the service of others.
I would particularly pay tribute to the young men and women of our armed forces who give such professional service to this country often in most demanding and dangerous circumstances.
They have my respect and admiration.
I also wish to express my gratitude for the work of those in the public service more widely - here in Westminster or the corridors of Whitehall and town halls, as well as in our hospitals and schools, in the police and emergency services.
But I would especially like to thank those very many people who give their time voluntarily to help others.
I am pleased that the Jubilee is to be marked by the introduction of The Queen's Golden Jubilee Award, a new annual award for voluntary service by groups in the community.
I hope this will give added recognition to those whose generosity of time and energy in the service of others is such a remarkable tradition in our society.
These enduring British traditions and values - moderation, openness, tolerance, service - have stood the test of time, and I am convinced they will stand us in good stead in the future.
I hope that the Golden Jubilee will be an opportunity to recognise these values and to celebrate all that we as a nation have achieved since 1952.
A message of condolence from Her Majesty The Queen to the President of the Republic of Lebanon
Prince Philip and I were deeply saddened by news of the explosion at the Port in Beirut yesterday.
Our thoughts and prayers are with the families and friends of those who have been injured or lost their lives, and all those whose homes and livelihoods have been affected.
Christmas Broadcast 2008
When life seems hard, the courageous do not lie down and accept defeat; instead, they are all the more determined to struggle for a better future.
The Queen's 2008 Christmas Broadcast focused on celebration and reflection in the year that The Prince of Wales celebrated his 60th birthday.
Christmas is a time for celebration, but this year it is a more sombre occasion for many.
Some of those things which could once have been taken for granted suddenly seem less certain and, naturally, give rise to feelings of insecurity.
People are touched by events which have their roots far across the world.
Whether it is the global economy or violence in a distant land, the effects can be keenly felt at home.
Once again, many of our service men and women are serving on operations in common cause to bring peace and security to troubled places.
In this ninetieth year since the end of the First World War, the last survivors recently commemorated the service and enormous sacrifice of their own generation.
Their successors in theatres such as Iraq and Afghanistan are still to be found in harm’s way in the service of others.
For their loved ones, the worry will never cease until they are safely home.
In such times as these we can all learn some lessons from the past.
We might begin to see things in a new perspective.
And certainly, we begin to ask ourselves where it is that we can find lasting happiness.
Over the years, those who have seemed to me to be the most happy, contented and fulfilled have always been the people who have lived the most outgoing and unselfish lives; the kind of people who are generous with their talents or their time.
There are those who use their prosperity or good fortune for the benefit of others whether they number among the great philanthropists or are people who, with whatever they have, simply have a desire to help those less fortunate than themselves.
What they offer comes in the form of what can easily be recognised as service to the nation or service to the wider community.
As often as not however, their unselfishness is a simply-taken-for-granted part of the life of their family or neighbourhood.
They tend to have some sense that life itself is full of blessings, and is a precious gift for which we should be thankful.
When life seems hard, the courageous do not lie down and accept defeat; instead, they are all the more determined to struggle for a better future.
I think we have a huge amount to learn from individuals such as these.
And what I believe many of us share with them is a source of strength and peace of mind in our families and friends.
Indeed, Prince Philip and I can reflect on the blessing, comfort and support we have gained from our own family in this special year for our son, The Prince of Wales.
Sixty years ago, he was baptised here in the Music Room at Buckingham Palace.
As parents and grandparents, we feel great pride in seeing our family make their own unique contributions to society.
Through his charities, The Prince of Wales has worked to support young people and other causes for the benefit of the wider community, and now his sons are following in his footsteps.
At Christmas, we feel very fortunate to have our family around us.
But for many of you, this Christmas will mean separation from loved ones and perhaps reflection on the memories of those no longer with us.
I hope that, like me, you will be comforted by the example of Jesus of Nazareth who, often in circumstances of great adversity, managed to live an outgoing, unselfish and sacrificial life.
Countless millions of people around the world continue to celebrate his birthday at Christmas, inspired by his teaching.
He makes it clear that genuine human happiness and satisfaction lie more in giving than receiving; more in serving than in being served.
We can surely be grateful that, two thousand years after the birth of Jesus, so many of us are able to draw inspiration from his life and message, and to find in him a source of strength and courage.
I hope that the Christmas message will encourage and sustain you too, now and in the coming year.
The Queen addresses The Royal Lancers at Windsor Castle
You have established yourselves as a unified Regiment and a force without matchBrigadier Hughes,I wish it had been possible for the whole Regiment to attend this ceremony, but I am talking as much to those at Catterick as to this representative party.
In the short time since I attended your amalgamation, you have established yourselves as a unified Regiment and a force without match.
It gives me much pleasure to present to you your new Guidon.
The Guidon symbolises sacred loyalty to your Sovereign, your country, and to all of the officers and men with whom you serve.
Your loyalty and devotion to duty have been tested over more than three hundred years, and never found to be wanting.
Acts of bravery and skill-at-arms run through your regimental history, and many of your most famous feats are recalled here, carried on this Guidon.
To mark my 70th anniversary as your Colonel in Chief I should like to grant you a further distinction – that of an honorific suffix to The Royal Lancers – Queen Elizabeths’ Own - in recognition of your loyal service to me and to my mother, Queen Elizabeth.
A speech by The Queen on the 40th Anniversary of her succession (Annus horribilis speech)
1992 is not a year on which I shall look back with undiluted pleasure.
On 24 November 1992 The Queen gave a speech at Guildhall to mark the 40th anniversary of her Accession.
In it The Queen referred to recent events as part of an 'annus horribilis'.
My Lord Mayor,Could I say, first, how delighted I am that the Lady Mayoress is here today.
This great hall has provided me with some of the most memorable events of my life.
The hospitality of the City of London is famous around the world, but nowhere is it more appreciated than among the members of my family.
I am deeply grateful that you, my Lord Mayor, and the Corporation, have seen fit to mark the fortieth anniversary of my Accession with this splendid lunch, and by giving me a picture which I will greatly cherish.
Thank you also for inviting representatives of so many organisations with which I and my family have special connections, in some cases stretching back over several generations.
To use an expression more common north of the Border, this is a real 'gathering of the clans'.1992 is not a year on which I shall look back with undiluted pleasure.
In the words of one of my more sympathetic correspondents, it has turned out to be an 'Annus Horribilis'.
I suspect that I am not alone in thinking it so.
Indeed, I suspect that there are very few people or institutions unaffected by these last months of worldwide turmoil and uncertainty.
This generosity and whole-hearted kindness of the Corporation of the City to Prince Philip and me would be welcome at any time, but at this particular moment, in the aftermath of Friday's tragic fire at Windsor, it is especially so.
And, after this last weekend, we appreciate all the more what has been set before us today.
Years of experience, however, have made us a bit more canny than the lady, less well versed than us in the splendours of City hospitality, who, when she was offered a balloon glass for her brandy, asked for 'only half a glass, please'.
It is possible to have too much of a good thing.
A well-meaning Bishop was obviously doing his best when he told Queen Victoria, "Ma'am, we cannot pray too often, nor too fervently, for the Royal Family".
The Queen's reply was: "Too fervently, no; too often, yes".
I, like Queen Victoria, have always been a believer in that old maxim "moderation in all things".
I sometimes wonder how future generations will judge the events of this tumultuous year.
I dare say that history will take a slightly more moderate view than that of some contemporary commentators.
Distance is well-known to lend enchantment, even to the less attractive views.
After all, it has the inestimable advantage of hindsight.
But it can also lend an extra dimension to judgement, giving it a leavening of moderation and compassion - even of wisdom - that is sometimes lacking in the reactions of those whose task it is in life to offer instant opinions on all things great and small.
No section of the community has all the virtues, neither does any have all the vices.
I am quite sure that most people try to do their jobs as best they can, even if the result is not always entirely successful.
He who has never failed to reach perfection has a right to be the harshest critic.
There can be no doubt, of course, that criticism is good for people and institutions that are part of public life.
No institution - City, Monarchy, whatever - should expect to be free from the scrutiny of those who give it their loyalty and support, not to mention those who don't.
But we are all part of the same fabric of our national society and that scrutiny, by one part of another, can be just as effective if it is made with a touch of gentleness, good humour and understanding.
This sort of questioning can also act, and it should do so, as an effective engine for change.
The City is a good example of the way the process of change can be incorporated into the stability and continuity of a great institution.
I particularly admire, my Lord Mayor, the way in which the City has adapted so nimbly to what the Prayer Book calls "The changes and chances of this mortal life".
You have set an example of how it is possible to remain effective and dynamic without losing those indefinable qualities, style and character.
We only have to look around this great hall to see the truth of that.
Forty years is quite a long time.
I am glad to have had the chance to witness, and to take part in, many dramatic changes in life in this country.
But I am glad to say that the magnificent standard of hospitality given on so many occasions to the Sovereign by the Lord Mayor of London has not changed at all.
It is an outward symbol of one other unchanging factor which I value above all - the loyalty given to me and to my family by so many people in this country, and the Commonwealth, throughout my reign.
You, my Lord Mayor, and all those whose prayers - fervent, I hope, but not too frequent - have sustained me through all these years, are friends indeed.
Prince Philip and I give you all, wherever you may be, our most humble thanks.
The Queen's speech at The Netherlands State Banquet 
Over the many hundreds of years of our shared history, there are few nations who are able to claim a closer bondYour Majesty,Prince Charles and I are delighted to welcome you and Queen Máxima to Buckingham Palace this evening.
Through this State visit, we celebrate the enduring friendship which has enabled our two nations to prosper and grow, side by side, as trading partners, and as North Sea neighbours.
This visit also provides the opportunity for great happiness, and to welcome old friends to my home.
Over the many hundreds of years of our shared history, there are few nations who are able to claim a closer bond.
This year marks the three hundred and thirtieth anniversary of the Glorious Revolution, when your ancestor, Prince William III of Orange, came to these shores and restored stability after turbulence.
Over 250 years later, in 1940, Queen Wilhelmina rallied the Government in Exile.
She became a source of inspiration from London during the Second World War, and upon her return to The Netherlands a symbol of liberation.
Through Your Majesty’s visits and your acts of friendship, you have formed your own personal connection with the British people.
During your time as a sixth form student at Atlantic College in Wales, you kept our local communities safe by volunteering for the Life Boat service, embodying the true spirit of friends supporting one another.
To this day, our close relationship greatly contributes to the economic and cultural life of Britain.
The Netherlands are one of The United Kingdom’s largest European investors.
We have a thriving Dutch community, and artistic and sporting exchanges are at an all time high.
British universities are a top destination for Dutch students, and hundreds of Dutch and British scientists are teaching, researching and collaborating in both countries.
Internationally we have a strong shared commitment to the transatlantic alliance, and it is no coincidence that of the last twelve Secretaries General of NATO, six have been either British or Dutch.
Our deep bond is seen in our obligation to uphold the rule of law in the United Nations Security Council and the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons based in The Hague.
It is also evident in our daily co-operation to combat cross border crime and terrorism.
I recall the State Visit of your grandmother Queen Juliana and Prince Bernhard in 1972, when I spoke of how our nations’ close understanding and relationship would become increasingly important as a new configuration of Europe was emerging.
As we look toward a new partnership with Europe, it is our shared values and commitment to each other, that are our greatest asset, and demonstrate that even through change, our enduring alliance remains strong, and as innovators, traders and internationalists we look with confidence to the future.
As we continue to work together to ensure peace, prosperity and security, I am confident that this friendship between The United Kingdom and The Netherlands, which we greatly treasure, will continue to deepen, and to prosper.
The Queen's Response to the Chief Engineer, on the Corps of Royal Engineers 300th anniversary
 I would wish all Sappers, wherever they may be, every success and good fortune in the future
A speech by The Queen on her Golden Jubilee
I hope that these celebrations will remind us of our shared heritage and what it means to be a united people, enjoying the support of families, friends and neighbours around us.
In 2002 The Queen's Golden Jubilee was marked by a summer of celebrations, with the highpoint a long weekend of festivities in early June.
During a lunch at Guildhall, London, on 4 June 2002, The Queen made a speech in which she thanked the nation for their support throughout her reign.
My Lord Mayor, Mr. Prime Minister, Ladies and Gentlemen,Thank you, my Lord Mayor, for your invitation to lunch at Guildhall today.
It is a great pleasure once again for Prince Philip and me to be in this historic building to add another anniversary celebration to its long record of national events.
I am more than conscious at the moment of the importance of football.
Although this weekend comes about half way through my Jubilee year, as far as we are concerned, it bears no relation to a rest at 'half-time'.
However, I am very glad that the fiftieth anniversary of my accession is giving so many people all over this country and in the Commonwealth an excuse to celebrate and enjoy themselves.
It has been a pretty remarkable fifty years by any standards.
There have been ups and downs, but anyone who can remember what things were like after those six long years of war, appreciates what immense changes have been achieved since then.
Not everyone has been able to benefit from the growth of wealth and prosperity but it has not been for lack of political will.
I think we can look back with measured pride on the history of the last fifty years.
Since the spring of this year I have travelled extensively in this country and in the Commonwealth.
It has been wonderful to experience the many special events which have brought together volunteers of all ages and organisations of all kinds.
At every stage along the way, Prince Philip and I have been overwhelmed by the crowds waiting for us and deeply moved by the warmth of their welcome.
We are both much looking forward to our visits to Wales next week, then to the other regions of England and in the autumn to Canada.
I am quite convinced that these local celebrations have helped to remind people of the value of such neighbourhood events in building a genuine community spirit.
I have seen this for myself in Green Street, for instance, here in the east of London; in St. Anne's Cathedral in Belfast and at that gathering of the young people of Berkshire at Bisham Abbey.
I hope that these celebrations will remind us of our shared heritage and what it means to be a united people, enjoying the support of families, friends and neighbours around us.
I take this opportunity to mention the strength I draw from my own family.
The Duke of Edinburgh has made an invaluable contribution to my life over these past fifty years, as he has to so many charities and organisations with which he has been involved.
We both have a special place in our hearts for our children.
I want to express my admiration for The Prince of Wales and for all he has achieved for this country.
Our children, and all my family, have given me such love and unstinting help over the years, and especially in recent months.
Your hospitality at this event, my Lord Mayor, is typical of the spirit of this Jubilee and the kindness shown to me by so many people over the years.
I would like to give my heartfelt thanks to each and every one of you - here in Guildhall, those of you waiting in the Mall and the streets of London, and all those up and down this country and throughout the Commonwealth, who may be watching this on television.
Thank you all for your enthusiasm to mark and celebrate these past fifty years.
The Queen's message to The King of Belgium
Prince Philip and I have been deeply shocked and saddened by the loss of life and injuries after the terrorist attack in Brussels.
Prince Philip and I have been deeply shocked and saddened by the loss of life and injuries after the terrorist attack in Brussels.
Her Majesty The Queen's Scottish Parliament Speech
It is perhaps worth reflecting that at the heart of the word “Parliament” lies its original meaning: a place to talk.
I have no doubt that for most of these last twenty years this striking chamber has provided exactly that, a place to talk.
Presiding Officer, First Minister, Members of the Scottish Parliament, The Duke of Rothesay and I are pleased to join you today in marking the Twentieth Anniversary of the Scottish Parliament.
We fondly remember that proud day, when new Members gathered in the Assembly Hall to celebrate Scotland’s first parliament in 300 years.
I have noted on previous occasions my great affection for Scotland, and the many happy and personal connections I enjoy with this wonderful country.
It has been with great pleasure that over the years I have watched Scotland grow and prosper, and have been with you at each stage of your parliamentary life, including on landmark occasions such as today.
Twenty years on, this chamber continues to be at the centre of Scottish life, as an important forum to engage and unite diverse communities and also a home for passionate debate and discussion.
Through new initiatives you continue to strive to be responsive and accountable to the people you serve, and to engage and involve those who might not otherwise participate in political debate.
It is perhaps worth reflecting that at the heart of the word “Parliament” lies its original meaning: a place to talk.
I have no doubt that for most of these last twenty years this striking chamber has provided exactly that, a place to talk.
But of course it must also be a place to listen --- a place to hear views that inevitably may differ quite considerably, one from another --- and a place to honour those views.
In turn, this occasion today gives us all an opportunity to honour those who help turn talk into action, not just Members of the Scottish Parliament but all those behind the scenes -- the many unseen, unsung individuals who are not afforded recognition by the nature of their role in Parliament, but who nonetheless join together to support parliamentary work in the service of others, and the success of the nation as a whole.
Presiding Officer, as we look to the future, it is my sincere hope that this Parliament, and all those who come to serve in it, will use the power of this chamber to celebrate those invisible pillars of our communities, and follow their example by working tirelessly to improve people’s lives, and strengthen the bonds of friendship and partnership both at home and abroad.

Ottawa, Canada, 13 October 2002
Wherever the future may take us, my admiration and affection for Canada and Canadians everywhere is - and will always remain - clear, strong and sure.
Prime Minister, Lieutenant Governor, Ladies and GentlemenI am grateful to you, Prime Minister, for inviting Prince Philip and me to this dinner tonight in these closing stages of my Golden Jubilee visit to Canada.
It has been a very special few days for us both.
The warmth of our reception at every stage has been truly wonderful.
There have been so many great moments: the Innuit welcome; the Canucks hockey game; the Toronto Gala; this magnificent dinner; and so much more.
We have been delighted by the enthusiasm of Canadians everywhere to take part in these Jubilee celebrations and have been overwhelmed by the crowds, the flowers and the many words of kindness.
Mais pour moi, cette visite memorable représente quelque chose de plus.
Au fil des cinquante dernières années, j'ai suivi avec admiration les transformations que le Canada et son mode de vie ont connus.
Il y a une telle difference entre le Canada d'aujourd'hui et celui que j'ai vu pour la première fois en 1951.
A chacune de mes visites, je suis fascinée de voir à quel point la vie a changé.
Cette année ne fait pas exception.
En traversant le pays, je n'ai pu m'empêcher d'être impressionnée par les développements que j'ai observés et dont j'ai entendu parler.
Le Canada est dynamique et innovateur - il s'est bien adapté aux changements et occupe maintenant une place de choix pour profiter des possibilitiés d'avenir.
But, Ladies and Gentlemen, for me there are constants, enduring reference points in these tides of change and progress.
There is the land itself.
Each time I come, I have only to look out of the aircraft window - at the cold expanse of the North, the forests of the West, the wide open prairies and the Maritime fishing inlets in the East - to be struck again by the sheer size of Canada, its beauty and huge wealth of natural resources.
Then there are the people of Canada; here is the country's greatest resource.
I have seen over the years how bilingualism and multiculturalism have moved from being an aspiration to a reality - not without difficulties, but with a determination to find particular Canadian solutions to the problems along the way.
L'engagement des Canadiens et des Canadiennes à bâtir une société où la compassion et l'acceptation font partie intégrante du sentiment collectif, à promouvoir l'excellence dans le domaine des arts et des sciences, à appuyer les efforts de paix et de développement à l'étranger, s'est mérité l'admiration des autres pays du monde.
And increasingly in recent years I have noticed and admired another constant - the confidence and engagement of Canadians, both in this country and in the service of others around the world.
It means something to be a Canadian.
As I have travelled across this country over the years I have been struck so often by such a clear sense of pride - in community and town, province, territory and nation - which is natural and strong.
And this visit has confirmed once again that this confidence and pride is well-placed.
It is a confidence and a pride I share.
And on this Thanksgiving Weekend in my Golden Jubilee year, I want to take the opportunity to express my profound gratitude to all Canadians, those of you here tonight and those of you across the country or serving overseas, for the loyalty, encouragement and support you have given to me over these past fifty years.
State Banquet, President of the Republic of Korea, 1 December 2004 
I was struck by the spirit of the Korean people, and their determination to overcome adversityMr.
President, Ladies and Gentlemen,I am delighted to welcome you, Mr. President, and Mrs Roh to London today.
Prince Philip and I were very pleased to visit the Republic of Korea five years ago, and recall with much satisfaction the warmth of the reception we received from Korean people wherever we went.
It is a great pleasure to be able to return some of that hospitality tonight.
During our visit in 1999, we were able to witness the remarkable recovery your country was making after the crisis which had had such a devastating impact on economies across the region two years earlier.
I was struck by the spirit of the Korean people, and their determination to overcome adversity.
We have seen how that determination has paid dividends, taking the Republic of Korea to its position as one of the world's leading economies.
The Korean people are right to be proud of this achievement.
At the start of my own reign, the Korean War was still being fought.
We remember all those who died during that terrible conflict, which ended with the division of the Korean peninsula.
Sadly, more than fifty years on, the peninsula remains divided, generations of families remain separated, and lasting peace remains elusive.
Mr. President, I look forward to the day when the Korean people are once again united in peace, and the entire peninsula is able to prosper for the benefit of its citizens.
We recognise the difficulties in reaching that destiny.
There are many obstacles to be overcome, but that same determination and positive spirit will ensure that Korea is well equipped to meet the challenges which lie ahead.
You will also have the support of many international friends, including the United Kingdom.
The bilateral relationship between our countries, formally dating back one hundred and twenty years, is now stronger and more varied than ever, as our exchange of State Visits reflects.
In particular, our countries have developed a prosperous economic relationship, which has seen major investment in both directions, as well as important and growing links in the areas of science and technology.
We have embarked on joint research and development projects, and continue to co-operate in many other fields.
We also welcome the many thousands of students from Korea who choose to study in the United Kingdom each year, and the increasing cultural exchanges between our two countries.
The partnership between the United Kingdom and the Republic of Korea extends also to addressing international issues of concern.
The contribution of Korean troops to reconstruction efforts in Afghanistan and Iraq, and the active role which Korea plays in global affairs, has earned your country great respect.
We share many principles on those issues, and we see your country as a true friend and ally.
Mr.
President, Mrs. Roh, I warmly welcome you both to this country.
Ladies and Gentlemen, I ask you all to raise your glasses to:
Roma Street Parkland, Brisbane, Australia, 3 March 2002
We have both been struck by both the diversity as well as the dynamism of Australia, and the vigour and humour of Australians everywhere.
Mr.
Premier, Ladies and Gentlemen,Thank you very much for your warm Queensland welcome.
I am very glad to be back here again in Brisbane.
It is one hundred and forty-two years ago since my great-great grandmother, Queen Victoria, selected this State's name.
When she did so neither she nor any Queenslander of the time could have foreseen how this State would have grown and changed.
Today it is a vital and confident society, drawing the best from its citizens from every background and known everywhere for its energy and hospitality.
During our visit we have been able to see something of the extraordinary variety of the State from the rain forest of the North and the outback at Roma to the resorts of the Sunshine Coast and today this magnificent city of Brisbane.
It is wonderful to see so many of you here to celebrate the first birthday of the Roma Street Parkland.
On this last day of my visit to Australia I would like to express my gratitude to you all for the warmth of the welcome Prince Philip and I have received at every stage.
Although the visit has been brief it has provided both Prince Philip and I with the chance to witness at first hand the way in which Australia is facing up to the challenges and opportunities of the Twenty-first Century.
Once again we have both been struck by both the diversity as well as the dynamism of Australia, and the vigour and humour of Australians everywhere.
Opening of the new Australian War Memorial, London, 11 November 2003
Twice within the span of a single generation, Australia and Britain stood side by side in two of the bloodiest wars in human history.
Prime Minister, Ladies and Gentlemen,Twice within the span of a single generation, Australia and Britain stood side by side in two of the bloodiest wars in human history.
The struggle was bitter, but by sheer persistence and dogged courage, the forces of aggression and tyranny were defeated.
But the cost in human lives and misery was enormous.
That is why I am so pleased to join the Prime Minister of Australia in unveiling this magnificent memorial to the hundreds and thousands of Australians who fought and gave their lives in battles at sea, on land and in the air wherever the enemy was to be found.
A full record of their service and sacrifice is inscribed on this Memorial.
It will stand as a permanent tribute to their partnership and sacrifice in a common cause.
All who pass it will be reminded of the immense contribution made by Australians to final victory.
Centenary of the Entente Cordiale, State Banquet, Paris, 5 April 2004
Vive la difference, mais vive L'Entente Cordiale.
Mr.
President, Ladies and Gentlemen,Thank you, Mr President, for your invitation to visit France to celebrate the centenary of the Entente Cordiale and for your generous words this evening.
It is a pleasure to be back in Paris on this my fourth State Visit.
Like so many of my countrymen I can never tire of this city's elegance and charm, and I am grateful for the warm welcome I have been given today.
I believe that we mark this week a most significant anniversary for our two nations.
If I may be allowed tonight one small British understatement, our historical relationship has not always been smooth.
For centuries we fought each other fiercely, often and everywhere - from Hastings to Waterloo, from the heights of Abraham to the mouth of the Nile.
But since 1815 our two nations have not been to war.
On the contrary we have stood together, resolute in defence of liberty and democracy, notably through the terrible global conflicts of the twentieth century.
This was far from inevitable when we reflect on how close we came to war over our colonies at the end of the nineteenth century.
That we turned away from conflict to the path of partnership was due to the single-minded efforts of a small number of enlightened individuals dedicated to Franco-British rapprochement.
Their immense achievement was the Entente Cordiale signed one hundred years ago this week.
I am proud of the part my great grandfather, King Edward VII, played in this historic agreement.
It was his initiative, and that of your President Loubert, to insist on reciprocal State Visits in 1903 which did so much to create the popular atmosphere for the successful political negotiations to settle our colonial disagreements the following year.
I hope that this State Visit, and the season of Entente Cordiale celebrations closing with your visit to London, Mr President, in the autumn, will likewise contribute to a new era of Franco-British partnership.
Our circumstances a century on are perhaps not entirely dissimilar.
For just as our statesmen and my great-grandfather realised a hundred years ago, we too need to recognise that we cannot let immediate political pressures, however strongly felt on both sides, stand between us in the longer term.
We are both reminded that neither of our two great nations, nor Europe, nor the wider Western Alliance, can afford the luxury of short-term division or discord, in the face of threats to our security and prosperity that now challenge us all.
Of course we will never agree on everything.
Life would be dull indeed, not least for the rest of the world, if we did not allow ourselves a little space to live up to our national caricatures - British pragmatism and French élan; French conceptualism and British humour; British rain and French sun; I think we should enjoy the complementarity of it all.
I believe our two peoples understand this sometimes more clearly than our governments.
Thousands of British are settling, living and working in France, and thousands of French are crossing the Channel to do the same.
Millions of British holidaymakers visit France each year.
We remain an island, but my arrival today by train reminds us that the Tunnel marks a profound psychological shift as well as a practical advantage for many people on both sides of the Channel.
Economically and culturally we are doing so much more together, as our companies invest both ways across the Channel, and the worlds of for example fashion, art and sport are increasingly interdependent.
We have perhaps yet to appreciate the longer-term consequences of these increasingly widespread human links.
The centenary of the Entente Cordiale is a good moment to do so.
I hope that we can use this anniversary to recognise and celebrate all that we have in common.
Britain and France are two of the great nation states of Europe - old, yes and proud of it, but eager to embrace the new, dynamic century that is upon us.
Our histories have made us frequent rivals, but like our forbears a hundred years ago, we now need to recognise that we are natural twenty-first century partners in Europe and the wider world.
Opening ceremony of the 17th Commonwealth Games, Manchester, 25 July 2002
It is my pleasure in this my Golden Jubilee Year to declare the 17th Commonwealth Games open.
Athletes from over seventy nations and territories are gathered here in Manchester, a city with its own great sporting tradition.
You come from the world over - Africa, the Americas, Asia, Australasia, Europe, all are represented tonight.
This message which left Buckingham Palace in the Jubilee Baton on Commonwealth Day last March has crossed every continent in its journey to this Opening Ceremony.
The Jubilee Baton Relay symbolises how the Commonwealth brings people together.
All of us participating in this ceremony tonight, whether athletes, or spectators, or those watching on television around the world, can share in the ideals of this unique association of nations.
We can all draw inspiration from what the Commonwealth stands for: our diversity as a source of strength; our tradition of tolerance, requiring respect for others and a readiness to learn from them; our focus on young people, for they are the future.
These Games, the friendly Games, embody these values.
I congratulate those who have organised this great occasion and I look forward along with millions around the world to following ten days of sporting excellence and athletic achievement.
A speech by The Queen at the Sandringham Women's Institute, 2009
In this time of change and uncertainty I think the W.I’s traditional values of playing your part through education and public debate are just as important as ever.
I am very pleased to be here with you once again at the January meeting.
I have read the annual report with great interest and I am heartened that the Sandringham branch of the W.I. continues to flourish, particularly in this 90th anniversary year.
I see from the Agenda that today’s meeting has a comedy theme, with contributions from The Last of The Summer Wine and Dad’s Army.
Like you, I look forward to these items later on.
Who could have forecast some of the historic world events that have taken place in the last twelve months?
The year ahead is one that many are approaching with a sense of uneasiness, but despite these understandable concerns there is also, I believe, much cause for hope and optimism around the world.
Of course, not all last year’s events were unforeseen.
In the spring, I paid a state visit to Turkey, a nation perhaps uniquely positioned as a bridge between East and West.
One of the highlights was taking a trip by boat along the Bosphorus, marvelling at the mix of ancient and modern buildings glittering in the sunshine.
Turkey was, I am told, my 86th state visit.
Even so, there are still some places that I had not been to.
Two such countries were Slovakia and Slovenia, both of which I visited, for the first time, in October.
These are friendly and welcoming nations – so much so that in Slovenia I was presented with a horse; a particularly impressive Lipizanner.
The captain of my aircraft was pleased to learn that the horse would be staying in Slovenia, and not flying back with the rest of the presents to London.
Presentation of Colours to the 1st Battalion Welsh Guards, 4 May 2006
In a Regiment with such a rich family tradition it must give considerable cause for pride and satisfaction that the present generation of Welsh Guardsmen loses nothing in comparison with its predecessors.
Colonel Malcolm, Officers, Warrant Officers, Non-Commissioned Officers and Guardsmen of the First Battalion Welsh Guards:It has been sixteen years since I presented you with the Colours that have just been marched off parade.
During that time they have travelled with the Battalion to Canada, America and Belize and have seen active service in Northern Ireland, Bosnia and Iraq.
Some of those watching today will have fought in the Second World War and other conflicts around the world, but all would find the challenges of a soldier's life today very different and more complex than those they would have encountered.
However, the same qualities which they showed in their time, are still required by their successors, who are so often sons, grandsons, or cousins.
In a Regiment with such a rich family tradition it must give considerable cause for pride and satisfaction that the present generation of Welsh Guardsmen loses nothing in comparison with its predecessors.
A speech by The Queen at the Irish State Banquet, 2014
We will remember our past, but we shall no longer allow our past to ensnare our future.
This is the greatest gift we can give to succeeding generations.
Mr.
President,Prince Philip and I are delighted to welcome you and Mrs. Higgins to Windsor Castle.
The Castle was founded by William the Conqueror almost a thousand years ago.
And a thousand years ago this very month, across the Irish Sea, Brian Boru, the most celebrated of Ireland’s High Kings, lost his life at the battle of Clontarf.
Yet, despite ten centuries of intervening history, Windsor Castle has had to wait until today to see a formal visit to this country by a Head of State of Ireland.
Prince Philip and I recall our visit to Ireland with great pleasure.
We were received warmly wherever we went.
Dublin; the city of Cork and its English market; Ireland’s historic landmarks like the Rock of Cashel; your people’s famous hospitality -- and, of course, Ireland’s thoroughbred horses -- all these and much more left a happy and enduring impression.
But even more pleasing, since then, is that we, the Irish and British, are becoming good and dependable neighbours and better friends; finally shedding our inhibitions about seeing the best in each other.
Our two governments have responded to the change in mood.
We now cooperate across the full range of public business; indeed, there is today no closer working relationship for my Government than that with Ireland.
This fresh spirit is helping us economically: our trade is growing, supporting many thousands of jobs in both countries, and we are working together to win new business overseas.
As our countries enter a period of historical resonance, it is right to look back in remembrance.
In Dublin, I laid wreaths in the Garden of Remembrance for those who died in the cause of Irish freedom and at Islandbridge where Ireland’s dead from the First World War are commemorated.
In August, we will mark solemnly the centenary of Britain’s entry into World War One, calling to mind the terrible toll it took.
People from Ireland were involved in all the major campaigns and battles of the war.
We will remember and honour their contribution and sacrifice, just as we remember our own.
My family and my government will stand alongside you, Mr. President, and your ministers, throughout the anniversaries of the war and of the events that led to the creation of the Irish Free State.
People have moved freely between these islands over the centuries.
Britain has been hugely enriched by the migration of Irishmen and women to these shores.
The contribution of Irish people to Britain has reached into every walk of British life.
On your visit, you are meeting men and women of Irish descent in parliament, in our universities, in our health service, in the civil service, music, faith, business, and sport.
And yet, over the years, many Irish migrants to Britain encountered discrimination and a lack of appreciation.
Happily, those days are now behind us, and it is widely recognised that Britain is a better place because of the Irish people who live here.
We can celebrate not just the Irish men and women who helped to build Britain but also the Irish architects who helped to design it, including that great architect of parliamentary reform, Daniel O’Connell, whose life and work you will have remembered this afternoon on your visit to Parliament.
Mr.
President, two years ago, London hosted the Olympic Games.
During that magical summer the Games proved to be a remarkable success, surpassing most people’s expectations.
They also shone a light on the modern links between Britain and Ireland, as Irish companies worked alongside British ones in building the stadiums and running the Games themselves.
And it took someone of Irish descent, Danny Boyle, to get me to jump from a helicopter.
Mr.
President, sadly last year we lost the poet Seamus Heaney, whose roots lay in the Northern Irish countryside.
His poems, written over many decades, reflected the changing circumstances of Northern Ireland, as hope and history jarred and then slowly began to rhyme.
I am delighted that last year’s G8 summit in County Fermanagh and the city of culture festival in Derry~Londonderry showed the very best of Northern Ireland to the world; and we will be recognising the work of individuals and groups who are helping to bring about further positive change -- including the charity, Cooperation Ireland, of which we are joint patrons -- at a reception here on Thursday.
Our two governments will continue to work together in Northern Ireland to support the First and Deputy First Minister and the Executive to advance the peace process and to establish a shared society based on mutual respect and equality of opportunity.
Mr President, the goal of modern British-Irish relations can be simply stated.
It is that we, who inhabit these islands, should live together as neighbours and friends.
Respectful of each other’s nationhood, sovereignty and traditions.
Cooperating to our mutual benefit.
At ease in each other's company.
After so much chequered history, the avoidable and regrettable pain of which is still felt by many of us, this goal is now within reach.
I started by speaking of ten centuries of history.
But there is a balance to be struck between looking back at what has happened, and cannot be changed; and looking forward to what could happen, if we have the will and determination to shape it.
My visit to Ireland, and your visit this week, Mr. President, show that we are walking together towards a brighter, more settled future.
We will remember our past, but we shall no longer allow our past to ensnare our future.
This is the greatest gift we can give to succeeding generations.
Commonwealth Day message, 11 March 2002
The true celebration of diversity involves reaching out, recognising and embracing difference, and in so doing enriching our lives.
Over the last fifty years the Commonwealth has undergone a remarkable transformation from an association defined by its history into the modern, multicultural organisation we know today.
Across those years, it has been the privilege of many of us to witness that evolution; to see at first hand the contribution made by the Commonwealth's leaders, as evident in Australia last week; and to share in the enthusiasm and warmth of its peoples.
Today, the Commonwealth is a meeting place for North and South, East and West.
It is built on diversity - which is why this year's theme, "Celebrating Diversity", goes to the heart of the association.
Politically, the Commonwealth sees its diversity as a strength.
That was certainly true of its invaluable contribution to the ending of Apartheid in South Africa.
The practical assistance it is able to offer in such crucial areas reflects the kaleidoscope of its membership and its expertise.
As a result, the Commonwealth was able to work with all the different communities of what is now proudly called "the rainbow nation".
Bridging social and political divides has also been a feature of the Commonwealth's continuing work in seeking to encourage democracy, good governance, the rule of law, and respect for human rights.
In all this, we recognise that promoting diversity is not just tolerating difference.
Living together as neighbours needs more than that.
The true celebration of diversity involves reaching out, recognising and embracing difference, and in so doing enriching our lives.
It requires respect for others and a readiness to learn from them; recognising that we have duties as well as rights; and seeking to leave the world a better place than the one we inherited.
As each of the last fifty years has passed, so too has our appreciation of the contribution made by the Commonwealth, an association of peoples as much as it is of governments, bound together by ideals as well as interests.
A speech by The Queen on her Golden Wedding Anniversary
He has, quite simply, been my strength and stay all these years.
On 20 November 1997 The Queen and Prince Philip celebrated their Golden Wedding anniversary, attending a lunch at Banqueting House in London.
The Queen made a speech in which she looked back on 'a remarkable fifty years'.
Prime Minister, Ladies and GentlemenWhen Prince Philip and I were married on this day fifty years ago, Britain had just endured six years of war, emerging battered but victorious.
Prince Philip had served in the Royal Navy in the Far East, while I was grappling, in the ATS, with the complexities of the combustion engine and learning to drive an ambulance with care.
Today, Prime Minister, we accept your generous hospitality in a very different Britain.
The Cold War is over and our country is at peace.
The economy in your charge, and which you inherited, is soundly based and growing.
And, during these last fifty years, the mass-media culture has transformed our lives in any number of ways, allowing us to learn more about our fellow human beings than, in 1947, we would have thought possible.
What a remarkable fifty years they have been: for the world, for the Commonwealth and for Britain.
Think what we would have missed if we had never heard the Beatles or seen Margot Fonteyn dance: never have watched television, used a mobile telephone or surfed the Net (or, to be honest, listened to other people talking about surfing the Net).We would never have heard someone speak from the Moon: never have watched England win the World Cup or Red Rum three Grand Nationals.
We would never have heard that Everest had been scaled, DNA unravelled, the Channel tunnel built, hip replacements become commonplace.
Above all, speaking personally, we would never have known the joys of having children and grandchildren.
As you say Prime Minister, since I came to the throne in 1952, ten Prime Ministers have served the British people and have come to see me each week at Buckingham Palace.
The first, Winston Churchill, had charged with the cavalry at Omdurman.
You, Prime Minister, were born in the year of my Coronation.
You have all had, however, one thing in common.
Your advice to me has been invaluable, as has that from your counterparts, past and present, in the other countries of which I am Queen.
I have listened carefully to it all.
I say, most sincerely, that I could not have done my job without it.
For I know that, despite the huge constitutional difference between a hereditary monarchy and an elected government, in reality the gulf is not so wide.
They are complementary institutions, each with its own role to play.
And each, in its different way, exists only with the support and consent of the people.
That consent, or the lack of it, is expressed for you, Prime Minister, through the ballot box.
It is a tough, even brutal, system but at least the message is a clear one for all to read.
For us, a Royal Family, however, the message is often harder to read, obscured as it can be by deference, rhetoric or the conflicting currents of public opinion.
But read it we must.
I have done my best, with Prince Philip's constant love and help, to interpret it correctly through the years of our marriage and of my reign as your Queen.
And we shall, as a family, try together to do so in the future.
It often falls to the Prime Minister, and the Government of the day, to be the bearer of the messages sent from people to Sovereign.
Prime Minister, I know that you, like your predecessors, will always pass such messages, as you read them, without fear or favour.
I shall value that, and am grateful for your assurances of the loyalty and support of your Government in years to come.
I wish you wisdom and God's help in your determination that Britain should remain a country to be proud of.
And, as one working couple to another, Prince Philip and I hope that on 29 March 2030 you and your wife will be celebrating your own Golden Wedding.
And talking of the future, I believe that there is an air of confidence in this country of ours just now.
I pray that we, people, Government and Royal Family, for we are one, can prove it to be justified and that Britain will enter the next millennium, glad, confident and a truly United Kingdom.
This, too, is an opportunity for Prince Philip and me to offer, in the words of one of the most beautiful prayers in the English language, our "humble and hearty thanks" to all those in Britain and around the world who have welcomed us and sustained us and our family, in the good times and the bad, so unstintingly over many years.
This has given us strength, most recently during the sad days after the tragedy of Diana's death.
It is you, if I may now speak to all of you directly, who have seen us through, and helped us to make our duty fun.
We are deeply grateful to you, each and every one.
Yesterday I listened as Prince Philip spoke at the Guildhall, and I then proposed our host's health.
Today the roles are reversed.
All too often, I fear, Prince Philip has had to listen to me speaking.
Frequently we have discussed my intended speech beforehand and, as you will imagine, his views have been expressed in a forthright manner.
He is someone who doesn't take easily to compliments but he has, quite simply, been my strength and stay all these years, and I, and his whole family, and this and many other countries, owe him a debt greater than he would ever claim, or we shall ever know.
The Queen's Commonwealth Day Message, 2011
Let us all give a thought to the practical ways in which we, as individuals or as groups, can provide support to girls and women – so that everyone can have a chance of a fuller and more rewarding life, wherever they happen to be born.
Last week, on the 8th of March, we marked the hundredth anniversary of the first International Women’s Day.
The idea of having a women’s day was first proposed against the backdrop of the rapid industrialisation of the early twentieth century.
From small beginnings, this idea has grown to become a widely recognised way of celebrating women around the world.
While some people use this day to acknowledge the love, admiration and respect for women, others use it to remember the great social and political strides made both by and for women in the last hundred years.
There is no right or wrong approach.
In the Commonwealth, every year, 26 million girls are born; and this equates to one new baby girl arriving almost every second of every day.
In the time it takes to hold the Commonwealth Observance Service at Westminster Abbey, nearly four thousand girls will have been born in Commonwealth lands.
And every one of these births marks the start of a new life, a journey which begins with the hopes of parents, families and communities, and which is continued through the aspirations of those girls themselves.
This year, the Commonwealth celebrates the important role that women already play in every walk of life and in every Commonwealth country – from the richest to the poorest areas, across continents and oceans, from villages to places of international debate, in every culture and faith – recognising that women are ‘agents of change’ in so many ways: as mothers and sisters, teachers and doctors, artists and craftspeople, smallholders and entrepreneurs, and as leaders of our societies, unleashing the potential of those around them.
And also this year, the Commonwealth reflects on what more could be achieved if women were able to play an even larger role.
For example, I am encouraged that last year the Commonwealth launched a global effort to train and support half a million more midwives worldwide.
In all this work the commendable goal is to create a greater opportunity for women as children and adults to pursue their hopes and dreams, to attain their goals, and to make best use of their talents and knowledge.
The Queen's Message to the Athletes
The baton relay represents a calling together of people from every part of the Commonwealth.
At Buckingham Palace last October I placed this message into the specially-crafted baton and passed it to the first of many thousands of baton-bearers.
Over the past 288 days the baton has visited all the nations and territories of the Commonwealth, crossing every continent in a journey of more than 100,000 miles.
The baton relay represents a calling together of people from every part of the Commonwealth and serves as a reminder of our shared ideals and ambitions as a diverse, resourceful and cohesive family.
And now, that baton has arrived here in Glasgow, a city renowned for its dynamic cultural and sporting achievements and for the warmth of its people, for this Opening Ceremony of the Friendly Games.
To you, the Commonwealth athletes, I send my good wishes for success in your endeavours.
Your accomplishments over the coming days will encourage us all to strengthen the bonds that unite us.
You remind us that young people, those under 25 years of age, make up half of our Commonwealth citizens; and it is to you that we entrust our values and our future.
I offer my sincere thanks to the many organisations and volunteers who have worked diligently to bring these Games to fruition, and indeed to the spectators here in the stadium and to the millions watching on television.
Together, you all play a part in strengthening our friendships in this modern and vibrant association of nations.
A speech by Prince Harry on the Queen's Commonwealth Canopy dedication in St Lucia
On behalf of my grandmother, The Queen, I am grateful to the Government and the people of St. Lucia for this most generous contribution.
Your Excellency, Prime Minister, thank you for joining me here in the stunning surroundings of Pigeon Island National Park.
It’s also a great pleasure to be here with representatives from each of St. Lucia’s 17 districts.
Planting these 20 trees represent your collective appreciation and respect for the natural beauty of St. Lucia and your forests.
We are all here today to mark St. Lucia’s commitment to The Queen's Commonwealth Canopy, a demonstration of this country’s determination to protect the environment and the strong historical bond with Her Majesty The Queen.
For those of you who don't know, The Queen's Commonwealth Canopy (QCC) was launched last year in Malta when 52 countries were asked to dedicate forest - or plant new forest – as a tribute to The Queen's long service to the Commonwealth throughout her reign.
One year on, 20 countries have come forward with projects and I am delighted that St Lucia is one of the pioneers for this initiative with the dedication of the Castries Water Works Reserve.
As The Prime Minister warned so vividly in his speech yesterday, climate change presents a serious and direct threat to St Lucia and to the forests in particular.
The Castries Water Works Reserve and other forests perform essential functions in safe-guarding and regulating water supply, preventing soil erosion and landslides.
They also support a rich diversity of plants and animal life on this beautiful island.
More broadly, the challenge of climate change is an issue which we, the next generation, must unite to tackle head on.
Learning from those with the wisdom of experience but also bringing a fresh and innovative perspective.
Climate change is already affecting the way of life of billions of people all over the world and it is those who have the least that are the most vulnerable.
However inconvenient, all of us have got to adjust our way of life if we are to reverse the changes we have caused - before it’s too late.
There is no second chance.
The QCC initiative provides an opportunity to unite us all, encouraging us to talk to one another, share our experiences and in doing so, develop new approaches and reduce our impact on the environment.
I encourage everyone to use this initiative to learn more about our forests and our planet.
It is up to us to change our behaviour.
An address by The Queen to the Scottish Parliament, 2009
I have been struck by the spirit of engagement and innovation shown by the Members as you seek to fulfil your commitment to serve the people of Scotland.
Presiding Officer, First Minister, Members of the Scottish Parliament: I am pleased to join you today in marking the tenth anniversary of the Scottish Parliament.
Presiding Officer, I well remember that day in 1999 when I addressed the Parliament’s first Members in the Assembly Hall on the Mound.
Outside, Edinburgh’s Royal Mile was filled with people from across Scotland and there was a great sense of anticipation throughout the United Kingdom as the first Scottish Parliament in 300 years assumed its legislative powers.
In my address I noted you had set yourself a great challenge – to be a modern Parliament, one which connects with the people of Scotland in a climate of openness and accessibility.
I have followed your progress with great interest at the Mound, in Aberdeen and here at Holyrood.
During each visit I have been struck by the spirit of engagement and innovation shown by the Members as you seek to fulfil your commitment to serve the people of Scotland.
The projects and activities which the Presiding Officer has spoken of are clear examples of your continuing commitment to your founding principles.
Principles which have served you well over the last decade and which I hope will continue to guide you in future.
To mark the tenth anniversary, we are joined by many of those children who celebrate their own tenth birthdays today.
These are children who have never known a Scotland without a Scottish Parliament.
Over this last decade, Members of the Scottish Parliament – past and present – have worked hard to address the issues of real importance to the Scottish people and have firmly embedded this Parliament as an institution at the heart of Scottish life and culture.
Your challenge over the coming years is to take the Scottish Parliament forward on the next stage of its journey, to build upon these strong foundations, to ensure that it continues to reflect the priorities and aspirations of all of Scotland’s people, and to retain the public’s confidence and trust.
Farewell dinner in Alberta, Canada, 24 May 2005
I have so many vivid memories and a tremendous sense of pride in being part of the Canadian family.
Prime Minister, Premier, Ladies and Gentlemen,I would like to express my appreciation to you, Prime Minister, for your warm words and I would also like to thank the people of Alberta for inviting Prince Philip and me to be part of their Centenary festivities.
It is a great pleasure for us both to be back here in Western Canada.
The story of Alberta mirrors in many ways the history of the country as a whole and you can be deservedly proud of the many successes of the past century.
Indeed the story of Canada is not unlike the topography of Western Canada — opportunities as vast as the seemingly endless prairies and as exciting as the rolling foothills and soaring Rockies.
Yet opportunities are meaningless if not for the dreams and the drive of men and women who work to make this land a special haven like no other.
Over the past eight days, Prince Philip and I have met hundreds of such Canadians in both Alberta and Saskatchewan.
We have both much enjoyed the chance to meet veterans, First Nations members, and men and women from all branches of the Canadian Forces.
We particularly appreciated the opportunity to pay tribute to the outstanding men and women of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police.
We have talked to volunteers, children and working people of all ages.
As in all our visits over the past 54 years, Canadians — both young, and young at heart — have welcomed us and have been our generous hosts.
And as in all our visits down the years, whether watching a chuck wagon race at the Calgary Stampede or athletic prowess at the Montreal Olympics, whether listening to an Inuit song of greeting in Nunavut or the skirl of pipes in Nova Scotia, I have always felt not only welcome but at home in Canada.
Of course the relationship between Crown and Canada evolves with the times - as it should.
But I for one can sense the continuity; it seems to me like yesterday that small girls offered me flowers on my first visit fifty-four years ago, yet today, I suspect, it is their grandchildren who are presenting the bouquets.
Prime Minister, you have spoken of my role and that of the Crown in Canada.
I would like to add that this country and Canadians everywhere have been a constant presence in my life and work, and I have so many vivid memories and a tremendous sense of pride in being part of the Canadian family.
This is a relationship I have come to treasure and a country for which I have a deep and abiding affection.
As Queen of Canada, I have had the privilege of speaking to you on numerous occasions since my first visit in 1951.
In doing so, I have attempted to convey the admiration and optimism I feel for this land and her diverse people.
Your enduring ties to the Crown stand not only for a respect for heritage, but also for the principles of peace, order and good government developed by the Fathers of Confederation who envisaged and worked so diligently to make this country a reality.
These nation builders entrusted these principles to us and we do well to remember this as we dedicate ourselves to building a better future for the people of this great country.
French Senate, State Visit to France, 6 April 2004
Democracy is the most precious gift we have and we can never take it for granted.
Messieurs les Presidents, Ladies and Gentlemen,Thank you for your most generous speech.
I am grateful to you for this opportunity in these magnificent surroundings to meet so many members of both houses of the French Parliament, as well as some of their colleagues from both houses of the British Parliament, during this visit to mark the centenary of the Entente Cordiale.
This anniversary gives this, my fourth, State Visit to France particular significance.
Looking back, it marks the anniversary of the far-sighted agreement which laid the foundation for the vital alliance of our two countries throughout the turbulence of the twentieth century.
Looking forward, it gives us both an opportunity to put behind us our recent tensions to address some of the challenges and opportunities ahead.
We have both made the choice of Europe and the European Union as a principal vehicle for our economic and political aspirations.
For both of us this does not, nor should not, in any way weaken our strong ties of friendship to the United States.
These are complementary relationships.
More than ever we are working to make Europe's voice in the world count, and to ensure that Europe's diplomacy can be backed up by military credibility where necessary and where NATO are not engaged.
In a dangerous world our two nations have so much to offer when we use our strengths together - our diplomacy, our military capability, our common permanent membership of the Security Council, our positions at the heart of La Francophonie and the Commonwealth.
Let us move on from our recent differences as our forbears did a hundred years ago.
As we all know governments can only do so much.
This is where our parliaments and our people can also guide us.
Our mutual attachment to parliamentary democracy is the foundation of our common freedom and values.
Democracy is the most precious gift we have and we can never take it for granted.
Links between our two parliaments have long existed but have not been as broadly based or as deep as either side would like.
National parliaments continue to have a huge role to play not only within our own countries but also in the development of the European Union of the future.
Our two peoples are perhaps showing the way.
We know each other better and better, as we visit each other more often, work together more effectively, settle in each other's countries, and enrich our two cultures whether it be in music or art, fashion or sport.
It is at this all-important popular level that so much has been going on in recent years.
Parliaments can not only follow these developments more closely, but can also lead them too.
I hope the Entente Cordiale centenary will contribute to this.
A Speech given by Her Majesty The Queen, Head of the Commonwealth, at the Formal Opening of CHOGM 
Having on so many occasions been welcomed to opening ceremonies around the Commonwealth, it is a pleasure this time to welcome you to my own homePrime Minister Muscat, Prime Minister May, Secretary-General, Ladies and Gentlemen,Having on so many occasions been welcomed to opening ceremonies around the Commonwealth, it is a pleasure this time to welcome you to my own home.
Here at Buckingham Palace in 1949, my father met the Heads of Government when they ratified the London Declaration, which created the Commonwealth as we know it today – then comprising just eight nations.
Who then -- or in 1952, when I became Head of the Commonwealth -- would have guessed that a gathering of its member states would one day number 53, or that it would comprise 2.4 billion people?Put simply, we are one of the world's great convening powers: a global association of volunteers who believe in the tangible benefits that flow from exchanging ideas and experiences and respecting each other's point of view.
And we seem to be growing stronger year by year.
The advantages are plain to see.
An increasing emphasis on trade between our countries is helping us all to discover exciting new ways of doing business.
And imaginative initiatives have shown how together we can bring about change on a global scale.
The Commonwealth Canopy has emphasised our interdependence, while the Commonwealth Blue Charter promises to do the same in protecting our shared ocean resources.
The Queen Elizabeth Diamond Jubilee Trust is providing life-changing eye treatment to many thousands, through the generosity and cooperation of the nations represented here today.
My family and I have been heartened by these and the many other programmes in which we are proud to play a part.
I am glad to see that young people, connecting through technology, are becoming ever more involved.
When I meet the young leaders of this century, I remember my own life-long commitment – made in South Africa in 1947 at the age of 21.
As another birthday approaches this week, I am reminded of the extraordinary journey we have been on, and how much good has been achieved.
It remains a great pleasure and honour to serve you as Head of the Commonwealth and to observe, with pride and satisfaction, that this is a flourishing network.
It is my sincere wish that the Commonwealth will continue to offer stability and continuity for future generations, and will decide that one day The Prince of Wales should carry on the important work started by my father in 1949.
By continuing to treasure and reinvigorate our associations and activities, I believe we will secure a safer, more prosperous and sustainable world for those who follow us: a world where the Commonwealth's generosity of spirit can bring its gentle touch of healing and hope to all.
The Christmas Broadcast 2020
Remarkably, a year that has necessarily kept people apart has, in many ways, brought us closer.
Across the Commonwealth, my family and I have been inspired by stories of people volunteering in their communities, helping those in need.
Every year we herald the coming of Christmas by turning on the lights.
And light does more than create a festive mood —light brings hope.
For Christians, Jesus is ‘the light of the world’, but we can’t celebrate his birth today in quite the usual way.
People of all faiths have been unable to gather as they would wish for their festivals, such as Passover, Easter, Eid, and Vaisakhi.
But we need life to go on.
Last month, fireworks lit up the sky around Windsor, as Hindus, Sikhs and Jains celebrated Diwali, the festival of lights, providing joyous moments of hope and unity — despite social distancing.
Remarkably, a year that has necessarily kept people apart has, in many ways, brought us closer.
Across the Commonwealth, my family and I have been inspired by stories of people volunteering in their communities, helping those in need.
In the United Kingdom and around the world, people have risen magnificently to the challenges of the year, and I am so proud and moved by this quiet, indomitable spirit.
To our young people in particular I say thank you for the part you have played.
This year, we celebrated International Nurses’ Day, on the 200th anniversary of the birth of Florence Nightingale.
As with other nursing pioneers like Mary Seacole, Florence Nightingale shone a lamp of hope across the world.
Today, our front-line services still shine that lamp for us - supported by the amazing achievements of modern science - and we owe them a debt of gratitude.
We continue to be inspired by the kindness of strangers and draw comfort that - even on the darkest nights - there is hope in the new dawn.
Jesus touched on this with the parable of the Good Samaritan.
The man who is robbed and left at the roadside is saved by someone who did not share his religion or culture.
This wonderful story of kindness is still as relevant today.
Good Samaritans have emerged across society showing care and respect for all, regardless of gender, race or background, reminding us that each one of us is special and equal in the eyes of God.
The teachings of Christ have served as my inner light, as has the sense of purpose we can find in coming together to worship.
In November, we commemorated another hero – though nobody knows his name.
The Tomb of the Unknown Warrior isn’t a large memorial, but everyone entering Westminster Abbey has to walk around his resting place, honouring this unnamed combatant of the First World War — a symbol of selfless duty and ultimate sacrifice.
The Unknown Warrior was not exceptional.
That’s the point.
He represents millions like him who throughout our history have put the lives of others above their own, and will be doing so today.
For me, this is a source of enduring hope in difficult and unpredictable times.
Of course, for many, this time of year will be tinged with sadness: some mourning the loss of those dear to them, and others missing friends and family-members distanced for safety, when all they’d really want for Christmas is a simple hug or a squeeze of the hand.
If you are among them, you are not alone, and let me assure you of my thoughts and prayers.
The Bible tells how a star appeared in the sky, its light guiding the shepherds and wise men to the scene of Jesus’s birth.
Let the light of Christmas — the spirit of selflessness, love and above all hope — guide us in the times ahead.

Maori gathering at Rehua Marae, Christchurch, New Zealand, 25 February 2002
New Zealand is working to improve and strengthen all the various relationships between Maori and the Crown.
E te iwi, Ngai Tahu, tena koutou katoa (To the people of Ngai Tahu, greetings).I am delighted to have the opportunity to be with you all today at this marae.
Thank you for your welcome, and your hospitality.
On previous visits I have spoken of New Zealand's efforts to resolve historical Treaty of Waitangi claims.
This has not been an easy path for anyone, and there still remains some way to go.
But I would like to express my respect for the courage of all those parties who have been working, in good faith, towards a resolution.
I am sure that a stronger nation will emerge from your efforts to address the past and move forward towards a shared future; a nation in which all the people of these islands can participate fully.
I know of Ngai Tahu's vision for its people's future; in education, society, and culture.
Your development programmes are now building the foundations for progress towards your goals.
This is a new and exciting course ahead - a course which will have its challenges as well as its achievements.
New Zealand is working to improve and strengthen all the various relationships between Maori and the Crown.
There is an important focus on ways to reduce the disparities between communities.
There are no simple solutions, as we all recognise.
But I am encouraged by your commitment to build partnerships to enhance the lives of whanau, hapu, and iwi.
Christmas Broadcast 2014
For every poppy a life; and a reminder of the grief of loved ones left behind.
In the ruins of the old Coventry Cathedral is a sculpture of a man and a woman reaching out to embrace each other.
The sculptor was inspired by the story of a woman who crossed Europe on foot after the war to find her husband.
Casts of the same sculpture can be found in Belfast and Berlin, and it is simply called Reconciliation.
Reconciliation is the peaceful end to conflict, and we were reminded of this in August when countries on both sides of the First World War came together to remember in peace.
The ceramic poppies at the Tower of London drew millions, and the only possible reaction to seeing them and walking among them was silence.
For every poppy a life; and a reminder of the grief of loved ones left behind.
No-one who fought in that war is still alive, but we remember their sacrifice and indeed the sacrifice of all those in the armed forces who serve and protect us today.
In 1914, many people thought the war would be over by Christmas, but sadly by then the trenches were dug and the future shape of the war in Europe was set.
But, as we know, something remarkable did happen that Christmas, exactly a hundred years ago today.
Without any instruction or command, the shooting stopped and German and British soldiers met in No Man’s Land.
Photographs were taken and gifts exchanged.
It was a Christmas truce.
Truces are not a new idea.
In the ancient world a truce was declared for the duration of the Olympic Games and wars and battles were put on hold.
Sport has a wonderful way of bringing together people and nations, as we saw this year in Glasgow when over seventy countries took part in the Commonwealth Games.
It is no accident that they are known as the Friendly Games.
As well as promoting dialogue between nations, the Commonwealth Games pioneered the inclusion of para-sports within each day’s events.
As with the Invictus Games that followed, the courage, determination and talent of the athletes captured our imagination as well as breaking down divisions.
The benefits of reconciliation were clear to see when I visited Belfast in June.
While my tour of the set of Game of Thrones may have gained most attention, my visit to the Crumlin Road Gaol will remain vividly in my mind.
What was once a prison during the troubles is now a place of hope and fresh purpose; a reminder of what is possible when people reach out to one another, rather like the couple in the sculpture.
Of course, reconciliation takes different forms.
In Scotland after the referendum many felt great disappointment, while others felt great relief; and bridging these differences will take time.
Bringing reconciliation to war or emergency zones is an even harder task, and I have been deeply touched this year by the selflessness of aid workers and medical volunteers who have gone abroad to help victims of conflict or of diseases like Ebola, often at great personal risk.
For me, the life of Jesus Christ, the Prince of Peace, whose birth we celebrate today, is an inspiration and an anchor in my life.
A role-model of reconciliation and forgiveness, he stretched out his hands in love, acceptance and healing.
Christ’s example has taught me to seek to respect and value all people of whatever faith or none.
Sometimes it seems that reconciliation stands little chance in the face of war and discord.
But, as the Christmas truce a century ago reminds us, peace and goodwill have lasting power in the hearts of men and women.
On that chilly Christmas Eve in 1914 many of the German forces sang “Silent Night”, its haunting melody inching across the line.
That carol is still much-loved today, a legacy of the Christmas truce, and a reminder to us all that even in the unlikeliest of places hope can still be found.
The Queen's address to the Scottish Parliament, 2nd July 2016
The Queen speech, as she opens the Fifth Session of the Scottish Parliament.
It is a pleasure to be invited to address you on this special occasion to mark the opening of the fifth session of the Scottish ParliamentPresiding Officer, First Minister, Members of the Scottish Parliament, it is a pleasure to be invited to address you on this special occasion to mark the opening of the fifth session of the Scottish Parliament.
I would like to begin by thanking you, Presiding Officer, for your kind words of welcome, and extending my good wishes to you in your new role.
You carry a heavy responsibility for protecting the reputation and good conduct of this Parliament and I have no doubt that you will follow in the steps of your predecessors in demonstrating fairness, good judgement and impartiality, as well as being a strong advocate of the Parliament.
Members of the Scottish Parliament, occasions such as today are rightly a time for hope and optimism.
The beginning of this new session in particular brings with it a real sense of renewal, with your largest intake of new Members since 1999.
For me, it also brings an echo of the excitement and enthusiasm I encountered that year , when many of the then MSPs ---  and I am pleased to note quite a number of you are still serving today --- set out on a collective journey in Scottish public service.
Seventeen years on, the Scottish Parliament has grown in maturity and skill.
Of course, we all live and work in an increasingly complex and demanding world, where events and developments can, and do, take place at remarkable speed; and retaining the ability to stay calm and collected can at times be hard.
As this Parliament has successfully demonstrated over the years, one hallmark of leadership in such a fast-moving world is allowing sufficient room for quiet thinking and contemplation, which can enable deeper, cooler consideration of how challenges and opportunities can be best addressed.
I am sure, also, you will continue to draw inspiration from the founding principles of the Parliament and the key values of Wisdom, Justice, Compassion and Integrity that are engraved on the mace.
These principles and values have already served the Scottish Parliament well and they will continue to guide new and returning members in the years ahead.
During this session, the Parliament will implement significant new tax and welfare powers in addition to other areas of public policy.
I wish you every success as you prepare to take on these extra responsibilities, and I remain confident that you will use the powers at your disposal wisely and continue to serve the interests of all the people of Scotland to the best of your ability.
As well as formally marking the opening of the fifth session of the Scottish Parliament, today is also a day where people will come together in Edinburgh to celebrate excellence in Scotland.
And I can say, without fear of contradiction, that there is certainly a lot to celebrate!
Today we are reminded of Edwin Morgan’s poem, “Open The Doors!”
and I understand that this afternoon's activities are themed around that poem, which famously has the line, “We have a building that is more than a building”.
What a wonderful way of describing this Parliament!
Norway State Banquet, 25 October 2005
I remember the bonfires along the coastline as we arrived and the enthusiastic welcome we received as guests of your grandfather, King Haakon.
Your Majesty,In 1955, on my first visit outside the Commonwealth, Prince Philip and I sailed up the Oslo fjord in Britannia to join the celebrations for Norway's Golden Jubilee of Independence.
It was midsummer, an enchanting time in Norway, and I remember the bonfires along the coastline as we arrived and the enthusiastic welcome we received as guests of your grandfather, King Haakon.
Today, fifty years on, we are delighted to have you and Queen Sonja here to mark this Centenary Year for Norway.
It is also a great pleasure to welcome Your Royal Highnesses on your first official visit to the United Kingdom, although you are no strangers to our country.
We are pleased to welcome you here for the chance it gives us to celebrate the close friendship between our peoples as well as our own families.
The kinship between Britain and Norway is rooted in a thousand years of shared history, which has left its mark on both our countries.
I have to say that the first Norse visitors were not always as welcome as our guests tonight, but many stayed and settled, and enriched these islands with new ideas, new language and a new culture.
Since then we have welcomed to our shores generations of merchants, seafarers and scholars, and in the nineteenth century, following self-rule for Norway in 1814, the Norwegian influence flourished spread by men like Grieg and Ibsen.
Britain was one of the very first countries to recognise newly independent Norway in 1905.Of course, I can claim a family interest.
My Great Aunt, Maud, who was married here in Buckingham Palace in 1896, became the first Queen of Norway and your father, King Olav, was born at Sandringham in 1903.This year also marks the 60th anniversary of the end of the Second World War, and the liberation of Norway.
Earlier today, you met British and Norwegian veterans who took part in the Norway campaign.
Britain was proud to stand with you as you fought for the liberation of your own country and contributed to the wider defeat of tyranny.
That outward-looking, global approach unites us today.
It was no surprise that the first Secretary General of the United Nations was Norwegian; no surprise that Norway is a significant donor of foreign aid, and is working with us and others to improve the lives of millions, especially in Africa; no surprise that we are such close partners and allies in NATO.Together, we share many of the challenges of today's world - tackling poverty, protecting human rights, addressing climate change and dealing with the new threat of global terrorism.
I was grateful for your message of sympathy and solidarity, and for the many other messages from ordinary Norwegians, following the bomb attacks here last July.
No country is immune from these dangers and we all need to work together to prevent those who wish to attack our way of life from achieving their aims.
Your Majesty, relations between Britain and Norway today remain as strong as ever.
The North Sea unites, rather than divides us - we are bound together not only by oil and gas pipelines, by air and shipping routes, by the closest cooperation between our armed forces, but also by a common outlook, a shared sense of history and of humour, of exploration and discovery.
Thousands of our citizens bear witness to this, travelling in both directions for business, study and pleasure.
Your visit at this time is therefore a moment of celebration for us both: a time to recognise the links that exist between us; an occasion to look back, not just at one century, but at hundreds of years of kinship; an opportunity to look forward together to the challenges that the new Millennium brings.
Scottish Parliament meeting on the Mound in Edinburgh, 3 June 2003
We see in this new Parliament, even after four short years, clear signs of a legislature that is distinctly Scottish.
Presiding Officer, First Minister, Members of the Scottish Parliament:It is a pleasure to be invited to address this parliament again and to do so once more here on the Mound in Edinburgh.
In your remarks, Presiding Officer, you referred to the challenges facing this new, diverse, legislature.
That diversity reflects the nature of Scottish society.
There are many different traditions represented in this Chamber and each can contribute to the shaping of Scotland.
Throughout this nation's long history, the Scottish people have demonstrated many strengths of character: determination, principle, tenacity.
All have contributed greatly to the life of the United Kingdom, the Commonwealth, and indeed the world.
This history is invaluable as a source from which to draw faith and confidence in the future.
Many of the characteristics of this new Parliament, such as its single chamber, the importance it accords to committees, the role of the Presiding Officer, can trace their origins to the old Scots Parliament as it developed over the centuries leading up to 1707.We see in this new Parliament, even after four short years, clear signs of a legislature that is distinctly Scottish, a legislature that is working, as you said, Presiding Officer, to fit contemporary Scotland into Britain, into Europe, and into the wider world.
It is a modern reaffirmation of the ancient bond that has linked crown, parliament and people for hundreds of years.
The days when Scotland was limited to a few Acts each year are now over.
Today, across a whole range of important issues, this Parliament is carving out a distinctly Scottish position.
I commend you, in particular, for your commitment to work in partnership with the people.
At a time when in many countries there is disengagement from politics, parliaments everywhere can draw on your experience with your petitioning process, from the regular meetings of your committees throughout the land, from your engagement with young people, and from your determination to employ the latest technology to reach out to the electorate.
Shortly, we shall become neighbours when this Parliament moves to its new campus at the bottom end of the Royal Mile.
The old Scottish parliament house was the first purpose-built legislature in the British Isles.
It is a building of great distinction and charm, sitting in the High Street, close to the people.
The new Holyrood Parliament will be rooted in the land of Scotland, in an ancient part of this capital city, dramatically linking this country's future with its past.
I hope that it too will be close to the people and be seen as a bold statement of Scotland's standing in the world.
Presiding Officer, when I addressed Members of the Scottish Parliament last year in Aberdeen, I said that I had confidence in your commitment to the service of the Scottish people.
I reaffirm that confidence today as you embark on this second parliamentary session.
I wish you well in your discussions in such a diverse Chamber.
The different perspectives to which you referred can, indeed, enrich debate and the contributions of all shades of opinion will be listened to with interest, I am sure, not just here but elsewhere in Britain, in Europe and the Commonwealth.
An address by The Queen to the National Assembly for Wales, 2011
I trust that, with these new powers, you will remain devoted to the task of serving the best interests of all the people of Wales.
Presiding Officer, Members of the National Assembly for Wales,It gives me great pleasure to be with you today on the occasion of the opening of the Fourth National Assembly for Wales.
I congratulate you on your election as Members of a National Assembly now charged with legislating for the people of Wales more widely than ever before.
These new competences will bring important challenges for you all.
For some, today marks a return to the Assembly for a further term, bringing continuity and experience to bear on the work of this chamber.
For others elected to this Assembly for the first time, these are new duties.
But whatever the combination of experience and new blood, this Assembly is here to represent the interests of Wales and its people, to make the laws for Wales and to hold the Welsh Government to account.
These vital functions of democracy now rest on your shoulders and much will be expected of you.
The National Assembly of Wales can call upon an impressive record of achievement.
It has coped admirably with the growth in the powers granted to it since devolution.
In the period since I was last with you in 2007, a remarkable flow of important legislation has been introduced in matters of real importance to the people of Wales.
This has covered a diverse range of topics, many with distinctly Welsh characteristics, and has often been greatly influenced by the interests of individual Members, Committees and the Assembly Commission.
During the various evolutionary stages of devolution in Wales, the Assembly has earned itself a well-deserved reputation for diligence and competence.
You are now entrusted with the authority to make laws in all matters contained within the twenty subjects devolved to the Assembly and, for the first time, you will be passing Assembly Acts.
The performance of the Assembly in discharging these new responsibilities will be closely scrutinised here in Wales and elsewhere.
But, on the evidence of what the National Assembly has already achieved these past twelve years, and with the commitment of you all, there is every cause for confidence in the future.
State banquet in Malta, 23 November 2005
We both retain a deep affection for your country and the outgoing, generous Maltese people who have always offered us the hand of friendship.
Mr.
President, Ladies and Gentlemen.
Thank you for your warm words of welcome.
I know I speak for Prince Philip as well as myself in saying how pleased we are to be back in Malta.
We both retain a deep affection for your country and the outgoing, generous Maltese people who have always offered us the hand of friendship.
It seems fitting that we should return to Malta in what has been celebrated as the Year of the Sea and in the sixtieth anniversary year of the end of the Second World War.
Our maritime links have been strong for many years.
It was by sea that the British came to Malta two centuries ago at the invitation of the Maltese, and the experience of the two World Wars added strength and depth to our enduring partnership.
All of us owe Malta a huge debt of gratitude and respect for the part your country played in defence of freedom.
I pay tribute to the wartime heroism, perseverance and indomitable spirit of the people of Malta, George Cross, which made an indelible mark on world history.
Mr.
President, we share not only much history but the outlook of island peoples.
The resilience and independence of spirit of the people of Malta and Gozo are remarkable.
You have much to be proud of: a robustly democratic Parliamentary process, excellent health care, a strong social safety-net, a sound education system at all levels, from primary to tertiary, academic to vocational - all this in the southern-most part of Europe with the wisdom to look south as well as north.
Your rich built heritage symbolises something more fundamental: the strong sense of attachment to place, of belonging, of togetherness of this island people which we from another set of islands readily recognise.
Likewise, we respect the social solidarity that exists here, and the tolerance and ready willingness to help those in greater need.
The range and tireless dedication of Malta's voluntary sector are deeply impressive: people giving freely of their time and energy to improve the lot of others.
Mr.
President, I believe that in this new century, together we face a challenge and we have an opportunity.
The challenge is to make the relationship between our two sovereign states more dynamic, even closer and more relevant to future generations; to strengthen what I believe to be the natural affinity of the Maltese and British peoples.
The opportunity is to do so by making imaginative use of the full range of our existing ties of family, of friendship, of language and education, of the professions, of business and of leisure.
For many years we have given expression to these close links in the Commonwealth and it is a great pleasure to be able to attend the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting here in Malta over the next few days.
Now since last year we have a new instrument jointly at our disposal: our partnership in the European Union.
Malta brings to the EU table, as she has long brought to Commonwealth fora, her expertise in negotiations to reconcile divergent opinions, her unparalleled network of friendships, particularly to the South and East of the Mediterranean and beyond, and her seasoned, democratic voice of reason and moderation.
Mr.
President, it is in our interests bilaterally, in the Commonwealth, and in the European Union that we should work together to build on the unique ties of history and shared sacrifice, to reaffirm the values we hold in common, and to reinvigorate the partnership between our two countries - what I am proud to describe as our partnership of choice.
I am confident that our visit will be an important moment to remind ourselves of the special value we attach to this relationship.
I now ask you all to join me in a toast to:
A message from Her Majesty The Queen to the people of Barbados on the 50th Anniversary of Independence
Since you became an independent country in 1966, you have continued to flourish and grow into a strong and confident nation.
Prince Philip and I send our warmest wishes to the Government and the people of Barbados on the occasion of your 50th Anniversary of Independence.
Since you became an independent country in 1966, you have continued to flourish and grow into a strong and confident nation.
The extraordinary talents of your people, from the cricket field to the music industry have been admired and recognised throughout the world.
Barbados remains a favoured holiday destination for British people, not only for the incredible natural beauty of your country but because you have a great warmth and generosity of spirit.
Over the years I have visited Barbados five times and you have kindly welcomed many other members of my family.
Our countries have a shared history, shared values and an affection which continues to bind us in friendship.
On this day of celebration, I send my congratulations to you on your Golden Jubilee of Independence.
National Space Centre in Leicester, 1 August 2002
Over this Jubilee summer I have travelled widely, but I hope I will be forgiven for having limited my tour to the earth's surface.
Ladies and Gentlemen,Thank you for inviting Prince Philip and me to the National Space Centre today.
It is a pleasure, as part of my penultimate regional tour of this Golden Jubilee, to be in the East Midlands, and to meet so many people from Leicestershire's varied communities, both urban and rural.
I offer a special welcome to Dr. Piers Sellers, who joins us from NASA by video link.
He is making his final preparations to be the next British astronaut to visit the International Space Station later this year.
I wish him, and all his colleagues, every success in their mission.
I am also pleased that preparations for the Beagle 2 mission to Mars are well underway and that its operations once landed will be commanded from Leicester.
Over this Jubilee summer I have travelled widely, but I hope I will be forgiven for having limited my tour to the earth's surface.
Last year I visited Northamptonshire and Rutland, and now over these two days I am completing visits to the East Midlands by being in Lincolnshire, Nottinghamshire, Leicestershire, and later today Derbyshire.
Each part of the East Midlands has its own identity.
But all counties have suffered as a result of the difficulties faced by rural communities.
And the coalfields have long been a source of employment across the region.
With their decline the energies of many people have been directed to regeneration, through alternative industries and improved environments.
As people adapt to changes like this, I would like to pay a tribute to those who work in communities on a voluntary basis to help one another.
I hope that one of the lasting legacies of this summer's celebrations will have been the establishment of the Golden Jubilee Award for Voluntary Service.
Here in Leicester, at that community level, you have a reputation for successful cultural integration, producing a distinctive city renowned for its festivals and carnivals, as well as its thriving businesses.
All faith communities are part of what it is to be British in 2002.
x
Information about the ceremonial detail of His Royal Highness's funeral Find out more about the history and Royal associations of this unique chapelInformation about National and Royal MourningPublished 17 April 2021Published 9 April 2021Visit By Simon Armitage, the Poet LaureateHe has, quite simply, been my strength and stay all these years.
My grandfather’s century of life was defined by service – to his country and Commonwealth, to his wife and Queen, and to our family.
Published 15 April 2021 I, like all my family, have a lifetime of lasting impressions.
Find out more about The Duke of Edinburgh's early life and education...The Duke of Edinburgh was a devoted consort to The Queen for over 60 years...The Duke of Edinburgh was a loving husband and devoted father.
Find out more...Visit Visit Find out more about His Royal Highness's links with the Commonwealth
Dinner in HMS Victory, 200th anniversary of Trafalgar, 21 October 2005
Success at Trafalgar was by no means a foregone conclusion.
First Sea Lord, Ladies and Gentlemen,Both Prince Philip and I are delighted to be able to join you for this very special celebration here in the Great Cabin of Lord Nelson's Flagship to mark his famous victory at Trafalgar exactly two hundred years ago.
The defeat of the combined French and Spanish fleets lifted the very real threat of an invasion of Britain.
It was greeted by the nation with huge relief, and it was the first step in the process of defeating Napoleon's ambitious plans for the domination of Europe.
Success at Trafalgar was by no means a foregone conclusion.
The British Fleet, under the command of Lord Nelson, faced a formidable enemy, but battles are seldom decided by statistics.
It was the qualities of the leadership and comradeship which he gave to the Royal Navy in the years leading up to his final battle that made all the difference.
He was without doubt a superb tactician and a fearless and determined commander, but he was above all a man of faith, duty and deep concern for the welfare of everyone in his fleet.
Tonight we recall his greatest battle and his death at the moment of victory, but we also remember his example of service and his humanity.
Just before the battle, Nelson sat down at the desk behind me, to compose his famous prayer in terms so typical of his character:-"May the Great God, whom I worship, grant to my Country, and for the benefit of Europe in general, a great and glorious victory; and may no misconduct, in anyone, tarnish it, and may humanity after victory be the predominant feature in the British Fleet.
"I now invite you to join me in the traditional toast:
A speech by The Queen at the South Africa State Banquet, 2010
South Africa and the United Kingdom have long been the closest of friends.
President Zuma,I am delighted to welcome you and Mrs Zuma to Buckingham Palace this evening as we celebrate your State Visit to the United Kingdom.
Twenty years ago last month Nelson Mandela was released from prison in South Africa heralding an extraordinary process of liberation and democratic renewal.
The task was daunting in its scale and ambition but was achieved through a deliberate and courageous effort of reconciliation and peaceful resolution of differences.
My first and highly memorable experience of South Africa was in 1947.
The extraordinary beauty of the country and the vibrancy and diversity of its culture made a powerful impression upon me then.
You can imagine how vivid the contrasts between that visit and my next were, nearly half a century later.
When Prince Philip and I visited South Africa in 1995, we could see for ourselves how much the country had changed.
Just one year after the momentous elections which had brought President Mandela to power, a new atmosphere of self-confidence and positive hopes for the future was already very apparent.
In the period since, by developing its democratic institutions South Africa has been able to tackle many of its internal challenges.
And on the international stage, having taken a seat on the Security Council of the United Nations and helped to bring peace to Burundi, South Africa has been developing a reputation for asserting its influence wisely.
Mr President, South Africa and the United Kingdom have long been the closest of friends.
Our countries share a strong commitment to tackling together the global challenges of poverty, development and climate change, and to encouraging others in the international community to adopt a common and concerted approach.
We can also point to the many other thriving, modern partnerships that exist between our governments, businesses and people.
Later this week, Mr President, you will be attending the United Kingdom / South Africa Business Seminar which will illustrate the great depth of our trading relationship.
Recognising that, even in unsettled economic times, London remains a global centre for trade, finance and international growth, some 600 South African companies have invested here.
In return, British investment has played a significant part in South Africa’s rise as a major emerging economy.
The bilateral relationship between South Africa and the United Kingdom is ambitious, developing many and diverse links.
Increasingly, for example, universities, local authorities, cultural groups and non-governmental organisations from our two countries are forging their own partnerships.
Of course, a rather wider engagement with the world beckons for South Africa.
In a few months’ time the FIFA World Cup, the first such tournament in Africa, will be in full swing.
Beyond the friendly sporting rivalries, I hope that the event will allow South Africa to show off some of the wonders of its natural environment and the character of its people, attributes which Prince Philip and I have been fortunate to admire at first hand over the years.
Mr President, you will know the old African proverb which says: “If you want to walk fast, walk alone.
If you want to walk far, walk together”.
I believe this epitomises the modern partnership between the United Kingdom and South Africa: working together to secure mutual benefit for ourselves and the wider world with equal conviction.
Ladies and Gentleman, I invite you all to rise and drink a toast to:
Osborne House, Isle of Wight, centenary of being open to the public, 19 May 2004
The Isle of Wight is well known for its hospitality, and the warmth of your welcome today is greatly appreciated.
Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen,I am pleased to be able to visit in the one hundredth year of the House being open to the public, and glad to find it is being so well looked after.
The Isle of Wight clearly has much to be proud of.
Our various engagements this morning - seeing the refurbished rooms here at Osborne House, travelling on a restored Steam Railway, visiting a Respite Care Home, and viewing a new yachting facility and an aerospace construction site - illustrate the things that bind us together: the heritage of the past, the values of our present and the shared challenges of the future.
And the guest list for this lunch alone illustrates the diversity of talent of which this community can rightly feel proud.
Opening of the new City Hall building in London, 23 July 2002
Your new building, which is so clearly based on ideas of openness and accessibility, will provide an exciting forum for Londoners as your debates ebb and flow.
Mr.
Mayor, Ladies and Gentlemen,Thank you for inviting me to open City Hall, this remarkable building which now becomes home to the Mayor of London and the London Assembly.
Today is not the first time that the opening of the seat of London government has been the occasion for a Royal visit.
My grandfather, King George V, opened the last seat of London government, County Hall, in 1922.
Now eighty years later I am pleased to be here for this opening today in my Golden Jubilee year.
This striking new addition to the capital's skyline is situated amongst some of our best-known landmarks which, over the years, have come to represent not only London but Great Britain for millions across the globe - the Tower of London, Tower Bridge and the Thames itself.
London's ability to combine the old and the new - embracing continuity and change down the centuries - is one of the many qualities which puts it amongst the great cities of the world.
Another is its status as a global financial centre.
This is a huge asset to the United Kingdom, making us the focus of international investment and contributing significantly to our national economy.
So it is appropriate that this new building looks out not just to the City of London but also to the East and South East, where so much of the new prosperity and dynamism is to be found - and where so many of the greatest challenges for London's new government exist.
The Greater London Authority is a new kind of government with an executive Mayor who sets the strategies and policies of the Authority and with an Assembly whose role is to scrutinize the decisions of the Mayor.
Your new building, which is so clearly based on ideas of openness and accessibility, will provide an exciting forum for Londoners as your debates ebb and flow.
A message from Her Majesty The Queen to the President of Ireland, His Excellency Michael D Higgins 
Lá Fhéile Pádraig sona daoibh go léirOn the occasion of your National Day, I would like to convey to Your Excellency my congratulations, together with my best wishes to the people of Ireland.
This year marks ten years since my visit to Ireland, which I remember fondly, and it marks a significant centenary across these islands.
We share ties of family, friendship and affection – the foundation of our partnership that remains as important today as ten years ago.
‘Lá Fhéile Pádraig sona daoibh go léir.’ [
Happy St Patrick’s Day to you all]
The Queen's Commonwealth Day Message, 2015
One simple lesson from history is that when people come together to talk, to exchange ideas and to develop common goals, wonderful things can happen.
One simple lesson from history is that when people come together to talk, to exchange ideas and to develop common goals, wonderful things can happen.
So many of the world's greatest technological and industrial achievements have begun as partnerships between families, countries, and even continents.
But, as we are often reminded, the opposite can also be true.
When common goals fall apart, so does the exchange of ideas.
And if people no longer trust or understand each other, the talking will soon stop too.
In the Commonwealth we are a group of 53 nations of dramatically different sizes and climates.
But over the years, drawing on our shared history, we have seen and acted upon the huge advantages of mutual cooperation and understanding, for the benefit of our countries and the people who live in them.
Not only are there tremendous rewards for this cooperation, but through dialogue we protect ourselves against the dangers that can so easily arise from a failure to talk or to see the other person's point of view.
Indeed, it seems to me that now, in the second decade of the twenty first century, what we share through being members of the Commonwealth is more important and worthy of protection than perhaps at any other time in the Commonwealth's existence.
We are guardians of a precious flame, and it is our duty not only to keep it burning brightly but to keep it replenished for the decades ahead.
With this in mind, I think it apt that on this day we celebrate ‘A Young Commonwealth’ and all that it has to offer.
As a concept that is unique in human history, the Commonwealth can only flourish if its ideas and ideals continue to be young and fresh and relevant to all generations.
The youthfulness and vitality that motivate our collective endeavours were seen in abundance last year in Glasgow.
They will be seen again in a few months’ time when Young Leaders from islands and continents gather to make new friendships and to work on exciting initiatives that can help to build a safer world for future generations.
And last November in India, talented young scientists from universities and research institutes conferred with eminent professors and pioneers of discovery at the Commonwealth Science Conference where together they shared thoughts on insights and inventions that promise a more sustainable future.
These are stirring examples of what is meant by ‘A Young Commonwealth’.
It is a globally diverse and inclusive community that opens up new possibilities for development through trust and encouragement.
Commonwealth Day provides each of us, as members of this worldwide family, with a chance to recommit ourselves to upholding the values of the Commonwealth Charter.
Adelaide Festival Hall, Australia, 27 February 2002
Whatever may lie ahead, I declare again here tonight that my admiration, affection and regard for the people of Australia will remain, as it has been over these past fifty years, constant, sure and true.
Prime Minister, Premier, Mr. Crean, Mr. Rann, Ladies and Gentlemen.
Thank you for your kind words.
I am pleased to return again to South Australia.
Prince Philip and I are grateful to all South Australians for your warm welcome today.
This is my fourteenth visit to Australia over the fifty years since my accession.
During that time I have witnessed a steady and remarkable evolution in the character of Australia and its people.
There has been a growing confidence; an increasingly global outlook; a recognition of the distinctive contribution of indigenous Australians; and the natural realisation that Australians can take on the best in the world and excel, whether in the arts, sport, military activity, intellectual endeavour, or business.
Australia long ago came of age.
Last year I joined with all Australians in experiencing a sense of pride that, one hundred years earlier, through a free vote of its people, the citizens of six separate colonies chose to put aside parochial difference - instead pledging forever to uphold common values, to accept prosperity and adversity alike, and to share a single destiny.
Such a peaceful assumption of national sovereignty is sadly rare in history, and this alone would have marked Australia out as an exceptional place.
But since then, and especially in the two years since I was last in Australia, you have demonstrated to the world that you retain the values so apparent all those years ago.
The Sydney Olympics, now perhaps simply a memory here, still resonate around the world as one of the greatest sporting occasions ever - achieved through determination, professionalism, and warm hospitality.
The courage and commitment of Australian service personnel in the fight against international terrorism is widely recognised.
They seek to defend this nation, and indeed all nations, from attacks against the democratic values and freedoms on which Australia rightly prides itself.
We all pray for their safe and speedy return.
The remarkable efforts of firefighters, many of them volunteers, in the devastating New South Wales bushfires over Christmas also reflect the true spirit of Australia.
I can only express my deep admiration of all those who so selflessly answered the call to help their fellow Australians.
Across the world, Australians are known for their creative energy.
This may not need saying here where the Adelaide Festival opens this week.
Your film and theatre industry, your many artists and authors are world class.
Many of their successes are seen in the full glare of media attention.
But others contribute to Australia's reputation in less obvious ways.
Australian farmers grow and export some of the finest produce available anywhere on earth, including the great wines of South Australia.
Local medical researchers find new ways to preserve or enhance life.
There is a constant stream of innovation and invention, and all this contributes to the high regard in which Australia is held around the globe.
Nowhere is that respect higher than within the membership of the Commonwealth.
Over this weekend the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting will be held in Coolum.
The discussions will be guided by principles which remain at the heart of this great community of nations.
And those principles reflect the ideals by which this country strives to live.
The Commonwealth is underpinned by the conviction that cultural difference can be transcended by a shared belief in higher ideals: the dignity of every individual and the right of each of them to determine the course of their own lives, unfettered by discrimination or disadvantage.
That too is a conviction which drives this country: a respect for diversity, and a recognition of the contribution of those from all backgrounds who have helped build this nation.
Within the Commonwealth, too, no one nation stands above another.
The leaders of India and Swaziland, of Dominica and New Zealand have the same weight at the same table.
Bound by common ideals, all are accepted.
So too an enduring quality of Australian society is its egalitarianism: all are fundamentally equal.
And the Commonwealth, like the Commonwealth of Australia, has evolved.
What was once a handful of countries united by their former dependence on the United Kingdom has become a multicultural international body focussing on good governance, development, the digital divide, and the issues confronting the smallest of nations.
As Queen of Australia, under your constitution, and as Head of the Commonwealth, I look forward to the coming few days here.
I look around tonight and I am aware both of my responsibilities, and of the pleasure those responsibilities bring.
And in this Golden Jubilee year, I cannot but reflect on the extraordinary opportunity I have been given to serve the people of this great country.
The way Australia evolves over the next fifty years is in your hands.
For myself, I thank all Australians, those here today and throughout the country, for your encouragement and support, your strength and wisdom, your honesty and good humour, all of which have sustained me and enriched my life.
Opening of the new Scottish Parliament building, Edinburgh, 9 October 2004
We meet in a remarkably open and transparent chamber, where this Parliament sits in the round in European fashion.
Presiding Officer, First Minister, Members of the Scottish Parliament,Thank you for inviting me to address you here today.
As you have said, Presiding Officer, this is the place where the land of Scotland and its people come together.
Building a Parliament to meet that goal - fit for the twenty-first century and beyond - has been a unique challenge.
It was Winston Churchill who commented, when the House of Commons had to be reconstructed after the Second World War: "We shape our buildings, and they shape us".
In Holyrood you have drawn not just on your own heritage but on the best parliamentary traditions of Westminster, the Commonwealth and Europe.
We meet in a remarkably open and transparent chamber, where this Parliament sits in the round in European fashion.
The mace reminds us that your procedures follow British and Commonwealth models.
The Honours of Scotland remain powerful symbols of the history and heritage which unites the communities of this land.
These communities, Scotland's people, are its enduring strength.
At a time when politicians around the world wonder how to draw closer to those they represent, I was particularly moved this morning by watching all who proudly made their way down the Royal Mile, people from every walk of Scottish life.
Ladies and Gentlemen, it is the task of this Parliament to give voice to the hopes of all these people, their families and their friends.
This Parliament has been shaped to invite them in, to listen to them and to speak up for them.
It is now your responsibility in their service to take advantage of everything that this remarkable building has to offer - channelling aspirations, resolving conflicting views, moulding the future of Scotland.
Certainly this new parliament building has had a difficult and controversial birth.
But that is all the more reason to ensure that, with the energy, flair and determination for which Scots are renowned the world over, Holyrood comes to be seen as a landmark of twenty-first century democracy, built securely on the foundations of accessibility, accountability, equality of opportunity, and partnership - setting new standards of bringing people and parliament together.
There is much in which this Parliament and Scotland's people can already take pride.
Over the past five years more than a thousand parliamentarians from around the world have come to Edinburgh to see your principles being put into practice.
In your procedures you are pioneering new forms of working in close association with those you represent.
In doing so, you add distinctive Scottish values to the British democratic tradition.
A Commonwealth Day Message from Her Majesty The Queen
Today, many millions of people around the world are drawn together because of the collective values shared by the CommonwealthCommonwealth Day has a special significance this year as we mark the 70th anniversary of the London Declaration, when nations of the Commonwealth agreed to move forward together as free and equal members.
The vision and sense of connection that inspired the signatories has stood the test of time, and the Commonwealth continues to grow, adapting to address contemporary needs.
Today, many millions of people around the world are drawn together because of the collective values shared by the Commonwealth.
In April last year, I welcomed the leaders of our 53 nations to Buckingham Palace and Windsor Castle for the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, and we all witnessed how the Commonwealth vision offers hope, and inspires us to find ways of protecting our planet, and our people.
We are able to look to the future with greater confidence and optimism as a result of the links that we share, and thanks to the networks of cooperation and mutual support to which we contribute, and on which we draw.
With enduring commitment through times of great change, successive generations have demonstrated that whilst the goodwill for which the Commonwealth is renowned may be intangible, its impact is very real.
Visit to Stormont, Northern Ireland, 14 May 2002
This Assembly can demonstrate that it is possible to build trust, and in doing so continue the building of a new Northern Ireland.
My Lord Presiding Officer, members of the Assembly, thank you for your warm words of welcome.
Over the last half century, I have always enjoyed my visits to Northern Ireland.
Even in the most troubled of times, I have been heartened by the warmth and good humour of the people I have met.
A small society has borne a disproportionate burden of division and loss, and so many people, from every part of Northern Ireland represented here today, have been touched by tragedy.
This includes the families of brave men and women who have died in the course of their duties, whether as police, prison and fire officers, or as members of the armed forces.
There is, even now, a legacy of hurt and mistrust.
But through it all the spirit of the people has been indomitable.
This has been a source of great inspiration to all who work for peace whether here in Northern Ireland or further afield.
Those who hold elected office in any society carry a heavy responsibility.
Here in the Assembly you have an historic opportunity to bring the administration of Northern Ireland closer to the people whom you serve.
The same is true in Scotland and Wales, but here there is one added dimension.
This Assembly, together with the other new institutions governing relations with the rest of the United Kingdom and with Ireland, can meet the aspirations both of those who are proud to be British and of those who feel a strong sense of Irish identity.
By working together successfully in this place, in the interests of all your constituents - and those too young to vote, in whose hands, ultimately, the future lies - this Assembly can demonstrate that it is possible to build trust, and in doing so continue the building of a new Northern Ireland.
Life has never been straightforward here, but I welcome the real sense of normality that has over recent years been returning to the lives of ordinary people, even if tempered from time to time by moments of disappointment and pessimism.
You now have a better future for Northern Ireland in your grasp.
I know that your many friends, across Britain, Europe and the world, wish you well, whether here at Stormont, or out in your constituencies, as you debate how that future should be shaped.
The Queen’s Christmas Broadcast 2018
The Christmas story retains its appeal since it doesn’t provide theoretical explanations for the puzzles of life.
For many, the service of Nine Lessons and Carols from King’s College, Cambridge, is when Christmas begins.
Listened to by millions of people around the world, it starts with a chorister singing the first verse of Once in Royal David’s City.
The priest who introduced this service to King’s College chapel, exactly one hundred years ago, was Eric Milner-White.
He had served as a military chaplain in the First World War.
Just six weeks after the Armistice, he wanted a new kind of service which - with its message of peace and goodwill - spoke to the needs of the times.2018 has been a year of centenaries.
The Royal Air Force celebrated its 100th anniversary with a memorable fly-past demonstrating a thrilling unity of purpose and execution.
We owe them and all our Armed Services our deepest gratitude.
My father served in the Royal Navy during the First World War.
He was a midshipman in HMS Collingwood at the Battle of Jutland in 1916.
The British fleet lost 14 ships and 6,000 men in that engagement.
My father wrote in a letter: “How and why we were not hit beats me”.
Like others, he lost friends in the war.
At Christmas, we become keenly aware of loved ones who have died, whatever the circumstances.
But of course, we would not grieve if we did not love.
Closer to home, it’s been a busy year for my family, with two weddings and two babies – and another child expected soon.
It helps to keep a grandmother well occupied.
We have had other celebrations too, including the 70th birthday of The Prince of Wales.
Some cultures believe a long life brings wisdom.
I’d like to think so.
Perhaps part of that wisdom is to recognise some of life’s baffling paradoxes, such as the way human beings have a huge propensity for good, and yet a capacity for evil.
Even the power of faith, which frequently inspires great generosity and self-sacrifice, can fall victim to tribalism.
But through the many changes I have seen over the years, faith, family and friendship have been not only a constant for me but a source of personal comfort and reassurance.
In April, the Commonwealth Heads of Government met in London.
My father welcomed just 8 countries to the first such meeting in 1948.
Now the Commonwealth includes 53 countries with 2.4 billion people, a third of the world’s population.
Its strength lies in the bonds of affection it promotes, and a common desire to live in a better, more peaceful world.
Even with the most deeply held differences, treating the other person with respect and as a fellow human-being is always a good first step towards greater understanding.
Indeed, the Commonwealth Games, held this year on Australia’s Gold Coast, are known universally as the Friendly Games because of their emphasis on goodwill and mutual respect.
The Christmas story retains its appeal since it doesn’t provide theoretical explanations for the puzzles of life.
Instead it’s about the birth of a child and the hope that birth -- 2,000 years ago -- brought to the world.
Only a few people acknowledged Jesus when he was born.
Now billions follow him.
I believe his message of peace-on-earth and goodwill-to-all is never out of date.
It can be heeded by everyone.
It’s needed as much as ever.

A speech by The Queen at the XVIII Commonwealth Games, Australia, 2006
Tonight we celebrate the value of sport as a means of bringing together people from seventy-one nations and territories.
One year and one day ago - on Commonwealth Day 2005 - I placed this message in this hi-tech baton.
It has since been carried round the Commonwealth on every continent and across every ocean by many thousands of voluntary Queen's Baton Relay runners.
I hope that everyone who saw the Baton during its journey recognised it as a symbol of the unity and diversity of our Commonwealth of Nations.
The Commonwealth Games are both a product of our unique organisation as well as a tangible example of the value of this partnership of peoples.
Tonight we celebrate the value of sport as a means of bringing together people from seventy-one nations and territories, and from a wide range of cultures, traditions and beliefs.
As we look forward to the next eleven days, I would like to remind you of the very successful Games at Sydney in 1938, in Perth in 1962, and in Brisbane in 1982.
Together they underline the impressive contribution that Australia has made to the successful development of the Commonwealth, and to the encouragement of good sportsmanship and friendliness throughout the Commonwealth.
I am glad to have this opportunity to offer my best wishes to every athlete and official taking part in these 'friendly' Games.
I congratulate everyone who has worked tirelessly to organise this great sporting celebration, which I hope will entertain hundreds of millions of people round the world.
Christmas Broadcast 1994
To see British and Russian veterans standing together, in memory of the sacrifices of their comrades-in-arms, was a moving experience.
In 1994 The Queen and other members of the Royal Family travelled to Northern France to mark the 50th anniversary of the D-Day landings.
The year also saw the first ever State Visit to Russia, during which The Queen and Prince Philip were guests of President Yeltsin.
The Queen's Christmas Broadcast in 1994 reflected on past and present peace efforts.
I shall never forget the events in Normandy last June, when the representatives of the wartime allies commemorated the fiftieth anniversary of the D-Day landings.
We who were there, and millions of others through television and radio, paid fitting tribute to the courage of those who took part in that epic campaign.
As Prince Philip and I stood watching the British veterans march past on the beach at Arromanches, my own memories of 1944 were stirred - of how it was to wait anxiously for news of friends and relations engaged in that massive and hazardous operation; of the subsequent ebb and flow of the battles in France and then in Germany itself; and of the gradual realisation that the war really was at least coming to an end.
Since those D-Day commemorations, Prince Philip and I have been to Russia.
While we were in St. Petersburg, we had the opportunity to honour the millions of patriotic Russians who died fighting the common enemy.
To see British and Russian veterans standing together, in memory of the sacrifices of their comrades-in-arms, was a moving experience.
I never thought it would be possible in my lifetime to join with the Patriarch of Moscow and his congregation in a service in that wonderful cathedral in the heart of the Moscow Kremlin.
This Christmas, as we pray for peace at home and abroad - not least in Russia itself - we can also give thanks that such cathedrals and churches will be full and that the great bells, which greeted us, will be ringing out to celebrate our Saviour's birth.
We are frequently reminded, of course, that violence and hatred are still all too much in evidence.
We can take some comfort, however, from the fact that more people throughout the world, year by year, have real hope of their children growing up in peace and free from fear.
Last Christmas we were witnessing the signs of a new dawn after the long bitterness, and this year these signs have become steadily stronger.
If that new dawn is to be a real and not a false one, courage, patience and faith will be sorely needed - those same qualities which kept the flame of hope alive in the war-torn countries of Europe and the Far East in the dark days of the last war.
Christ taught us to love our enemies and to do good to them that hate us.
It is a hard lesson to learn, but this year we have seen shining examples of that generosity of spirit which alone can banish division and prejudice.
In Northern Ireland, peace is gradually taking root; a fully democratic South Africa has been welcomed back into the Commonwealth; and, in the Middle East, long-standing enmities are healing.
What is it that makes people turn from violence, and try to bring peace to their community?
Most of all, I believe, it is their determination to bring reality to their hopes of a better world for their children.
The sight of the happy faces of children and young people in Russia, in South Africa, where so much has changed with such extraordinary speed in the last year, and in Northern Ireland, where there is real hope of a permanent end to the bitterness of recent years, should be enough to convince even the most hard-hearted that peace is worth striving for.
Next year, we shall commemorate the fiftieth anniversary of the end of the Second World War.
The celebrations will no doubt be spectacular, and I hope we all enjoy them.
But we can also, each in our own way, ensure that they leave a lasting mark in history.
If we resolve to be considerate and to help our neighbours; to make friends with people of different races and religions; and, as our Lord said, to look to our own faults before we criticise others, we will be keeping faith with those who landed in Normandy and fought so doggedly for their belief in freedom, peace and human decency.
The poet Siegfried Sassoon, amidst all the horrors of war, still found himself able to write these words:-"Everyone's voice was suddenly lifted
	And beauty came like the setting sun.
"If he could see the beauty from the trenches of Flanders surely we can look for it in our own lives, this Christmas and in the coming year.
A speech by The Queen at Heathrow airport's Terminal Five, 2008
I am sure that many millions of travellers will have reason to be appreciative of the thought and care that has gone into the design, construction, and ongoing maintenance of this significant new terminal.
I am delighted to be here at Heathrow today, to join these special celebrations and formally to declare Terminal Five ready for business.
Looking around this bright and airy space with its clean, efficient layout, I am sure that many millions of travellers will have reason to be appreciative of the thought and care that has gone into the design, construction, and ongoing maintenance of this significant new terminal.
It provides an encouraging illustration of what can be achieved through working in partnership, and it says a good deal about how the essential considerations of passenger comfort, effective security, and quality of service, can be combined with the ever more important requirement of environmental responsibility.
My warmest congratulations go to everyone who has worked on this highly impressive building; it embodies many achievements, of which you can all be rightly proud.
Message to Acting Commissioner of the Metropolitan Police Service Craig Mackey
My thoughts, prayers, and deepest sympathy are with all those who have been affected by yesterday's awful violence.
Following the shocking events in Westminster, Prince Philip and I are sorry that we will not be able to open the New Scotland Yard building as planned today, for very understandable reasons.
I look forward to visiting at a later date.
My thoughts, prayers, and deepest sympathy are with all those who have been affected by yesterday's awful violence.
I know I speak for everyone in expressing my enduring thanks and admiration for the members of the Metropolitan Police Service and all who work so selflessly to help and protect others.
ELIZABETH R.
Sovereign's Parade, Royal Military Academy Sandhurst, 12 April 2006
This day marks the beginning of what I hope will be highly successful careers as officers in the British Army or the armies of our friends and allies.
This is a very special occasion for me, as it is for all of you who are gaining your commissions today.
It is also a great occasion for your families and friends.
This day marks the beginning of what I hope will be highly successful careers as officers in the British Army or the armies of our friends and allies, and I am pleased to see so many cadets from the Commonwealth and other countries on parade.
Many people seem to believe that the preparation to become an officer is merely a matter of acquiring some basic understanding of military procedures and of achieving high standards in physical fitness.
I believe that there is rather more to it than that.
It is also the first step in learning how to become leaders.
Many talented young people can learn the principles of management; but effective leadership is far more demanding.
It will be your success as leaders that will decide the progress of your careers in the Army.
It will depend on how you exercise your responsibilities to other people and how you exercise your responsibilities for other people.
If you look at the careers of successful officers, you will find that, no matter how clever they may have been, what really matters is how they related to people under their command.
It is an art not a science, and it needs constant attention and refinement to achieve the highest standards.
It was not by chance that the motto chosen for the Royal Military Academy is "Serve to Lead".
A speech by The Queen at the Commonwealth Reception, 2013
I hope the carefully chosen words of the Charter will reinvigorate efforts, already begun, to make the Commonwealth fit and agile for the years ahead.
I am delighted to join you for Commonwealth Day.
I am grateful to you, Mr. Secretary-General, for your kind and generous sentiments, and for your thoughtful words about the link between the Crown and the Commonwealth and its enduring value.
In the twelve months since we last gathered here, I have been especially touched by the messages of support and good wishes from around the Commonwealth, and by the warmth of the reception given to members of my family as they represented me during the celebrations of the Diamond Jubilee.
Throughout the ages, Charters have been seen as special documents, designed with care to stand the test of time.
The Charter I will sign today, on behalf of you all, represents a significant milestone as the Commonwealth continues its journey of development and renewal.
We now have, for the first time, a single document that captures the core values and aspirations of the Commonwealth and all its members.
It will light the path of all those involved in the work of the Commonwealth, and of those who follow in our footsteps.
I hope the carefully chosen words of the Charter will reinvigorate efforts, already begun, to make the Commonwealth fit and agile for the years ahead, so that it can apply its global wisdom to the hopes and needs of this and future generations.
A speech by Princess Alexandra at a reception to celebrate her Patronages
I am proud to know of the excellent progress you continue to make in the many different fields represented here First, I must thank Your Majesty for your kind generosity in giving this wonderful Reception.
Many of you here this evening represent organisations with whom The Queen has been affiliated for over 60 years.
There are others, passed on to me from Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother and from my own Mother, Princess Marina.
Today, by coincidence, is the date of the Wedding Anniversary of my parents.
The success of a Charity relies heavily on the dedication of hard-working volunteers and I am proud to know of the excellent progress you continue to make in the many different fields represented here - from the Armed Services, Community and Social Services, Culture, Education, the Environment and Health Services.
Lunch in Newport, South Wales, 13 June 2002
The mountains and valleys are as beautiful as ever, but it is in rural life that some of the greatest transformation has taken place.
Mr.
Mayor, Ladies and Gentlemen,Prynhawn da.
It is a great pleasure for Prince Philip and me to be back in Wales for this Jubilee tour.
We are this year remembering the past half century, but my memories of Wales go back more than that.
Indeed I carry a small reminder of this country wherever I go as my wedding ring is made from Welsh gold.
I have been very struck on my journey through Wales over the past three days by the mixture of history and hope for the future.
The roots of your identity and communities are deep, but you are building on these traditions.
There are signs of immense changes everywhere The Duke of Edinburgh and I have visited.
The mountains and valleys are as beautiful as ever, but it is in rural life that some of the greatest transformation has taken place.
Of course there has been a profound change in the areas which once depended on coal and steel.
This has meant hard times for very many people.
The past 50 years has witnessed the birth of a devolved National Assembly for Wales and along with political identity has come a revival of the Welsh language and culture.
Common to these developments is the Welsh people's determination to face the challenges of the 21st century with tough-minded optimism and ingenuity.
The farming community, after so many difficulties, has been making a huge effort to revive interest here and abroad in Welsh food and I see that we are about to sit down to a lunch prepared exclusively from Welsh produce.
You export Welsh water all over the world and there are now 50 kinds of Welsh cheese in production.
Communities originally built around mines have attracted new investment in high technology, and jobs in financial services.
Wales has led the world in the restoration of industrial land.
That expertise helped to create such impressive projects as the Millennium Coastal Park in Llanelli, which I opened yesterday.
The rest of the United Kingdom owes a great deal to your artists, sportsmen, and - perhaps best known - your musicians.
Shirley Bassey and Tom Jones were singing in the garden of Buckingham Palace only last week.
And so I am particularly pleased today to announce that I have agreed that the Welsh College of Music and Drama in Cardiff can be called the Royal Welsh College of Music and Drama.
Nowhere illustrates the strengths and variety of present-day Wales better than its most-recently created city, Newport.
This has been an important gateway to the rest of Wales since Roman times.
More than a billion pounds of inward investment has come here in the past 10 years into a thriving and ethnically-diverse community.
A speech by The Queen to mark the 100th Anniversary of The Royal Air Force
The Royal Air Force has won a place in the heart of our Nation, and I wish All Ranks, past and present, together with your families, every good fortune for your second century of serviceChief of the Air Staff, today is a very special day.
Presenting the Royal Air Force with a New Queen's Colour provides an opportunity to congratulate the Service for your remarkable contribution to Defence over the last hundred years.
Tenacity, skill and gallantry have been your hallmarks, as you have helped to safeguard freedom and security in many parts of the world.
I remember the Battle of Britain being fought in the skies above us, and we shall never forget the courage and sacrifice of that time.
In 1918, my father, King George VI, served alongside one of the Service's founders, Lord Trenchard, before becoming the first of my family to qualify as a Royal Air Force pilot.
That family tradition continues to this day: The Duke of Edinburgh, The Prince of Wales and The Duke of Cambridge have all earned their Wings, and wear them with great pride.
The Royal Air Force has won a place in the heart of our Nation, and I wish All Ranks, past and present, together with your families, every good fortune for your second century of service.
Saskatchewan Legislature, Canada, 18 May 2005
My mother once said that this country felt like a "home away from home" for the Queen of Canada.
Ladies and gentlemen, six decades later it still does...Prime Minister and Premier, Ladies and Gentlemen,Thank you for welcoming Prince Philip and me so warmly to Canada and to Saskatchewan.
We would like in turn to send a message of greetings to you all as we come together to celebrate the Centennials of both Saskatchewan and Alberta.
May I also express my appreciation to you, Prime Minister, for the gift you have offered to mark my visit.
The "Memory Project" has most successfully brought together veterans and young Canadians throughout the country.
In the process it has safeguarded not only many remarkable stories of the veterans, but also a unique chapter of this country's history.
It is a most imaginative gift; it links the admiration I have for those who fought for freedom all those years ago with the confidence and pride I feel when I look into the faces of young Canadians today.
It fits well with the theme chosen for this visit, to acknowledge "The Spirit of Nation Builders."
And what better place could there be than the vast Canadian prairies to pay homage to those ancestors, beginning with the First Nations and Metis Peoples, who shaped the country with a common vision and with a determination to build a better life for themselves, and a better country for their children and grandchildren.
This is my twenty-second journey to Canada, but the memories of my first visit are still fresh in my mind.
I remember the magnitude of this country, matched only by the generosity and kindness of the people whom I met along the way, not least here.
Since then, Prince Philip and I have seen Saskatchewan evolve into a forward-looking province of fertile landscapes, dynamic towns and cities with expanding, diverse communities taking great pride in what you have built - and continue to build - together.
May I take this opportunity to salute an exceptional group of people who have been with me on all my visits - the Royal Canadian Mounted Police.
While the scarlet tunic of the Mountie has come to symbolise Canada throughout the world, it is the Mountie's dedication to service and honour that embodies the spirit of so many of those who have built this nation as we now know it.
Tomorrow, Prince Philip and I will attend a memorial service at Depot Division here in Regina.
Along with all Canadians, we will pay tribute to the four courageous members of the Force who died in the line of duty last March.
Today, there will be a happier event to mark, thanks once again to the men and women of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police.
In 1969, they gave me a most generous gift - a black mare named Burmese whom I rode for eighteen years.
It will give me great pleasure to unveil a statue of Burmese here outside the Legislature to mark this Centennial.
When we were last here in 1987, I spoke of the Crown in the daily life of Canada, of my role as your Queen and my bond with this land and its people.
I spoke then as much to the youth of Saskatchewan as to their parents and grandparents.
Just eighteen years later I am pleased to learn that some of those young people whom I addressed then are now active in shaping the life of this province in the twenty-first century.
From their ranks are coming some of the dynamic leaders of every profession who are placing Saskatchewan so firmly on the national and global stage.
Premier, you have noted the role of the Crown as a symbol of national identity for Canada and Saskatchewan.
To others, one of the strongest and most valued assets of the Crown is the stability and continuity it can bring from the past into the present.
My mother once said that this country felt like a "home away from home" for the Queen of Canada.
Ladies and gentlemen, six decades later it still does.... and it is good to be back.
Harewood House in Yorkshire, 11 July 2002
The character of Yorkshire's people is distinctive and unchanging: trenchant, determined, and welcoming.
Prince Philip and I are delighted to be in Yorkshire, celebrating the last fifty years in the life of the region.
Yorkshiremen and women appear everywhere.
When we were in Australia and New Zealand earlier this year I was reminded that it was from Yorkshire that Captain James Cook set out over 200 years ago.
More recently, you have produced great modern artists, some of the world's best cricketers and umpires, and also a Speaker of the House of Commons!We are very grateful to all those who have taken part in today's event, be they performers, organisers, guests, or members of the public, and to my cousin Lord Harewood for allowing this occasion to take place in such spectacular surroundings.
As we have seen this afternoon, Yorkshire is a diverse region.
The great conurbations of Leeds, Bradford, Sheffield and York are matched by the broad acres of the Yorkshire Dales and the North York Moors.
Few places in Britain are more ethnically diverse.
Yorkshire boasts long traditions, and yet over the last fifty years has been at the forefront of change, not least economic.
During these two days Prince Philip and I are seeing some of these contrasts, from the National Coal Mining Museum, a tribute to the effort and sacrifices of so many men, to today's young financiers and television production staff, who are making the service industries so important to employment and prosperity here.
Tomorrow we visit Beverley, and will meet those involved in Yorkshire's rural life.
But whatever the differences, there is a thread which runs through this patchwork.
The character of Yorkshire's people is distinctive and unchanging: trenchant, determined, and welcoming.
A message from Her Majesty The Queen to the Lord-Lieutenant of Greater Manchester
The whole nation has been shocked by the death and injury in Manchester last night of so many people, adults and children, who had just been enjoying a concert.
I know I speak for everyone in expressing my deepest sympathy to all who have been affected by this dreadful event and especially to the families and friends of those who have died or were injured.
I want to thank all the members of the emergency services, who have responded with such professionalism and care.
And I would like to express my admiration for the way the people of Manchester have responded, with humanity and compassion, to this act of barbarity.
The tenth anniversary of the Christchurch earthquakes
Her Majesty's message was read by the Governor-General during a National Service of Commemoration held on the tenth anniversary of the earthquakes at the Canterbury Earthquake National Memorial in Christchurch, New Zealand.
While there are many sad memories of that terrible time, there is also solace in remembering how your community rose to the challenge of rebuilding your lives and supporting each other.
On the tenth Anniversary of the Canterbury earthquakes, as you gather to remember those lost and reflect on the devastating effects these earthquakes had on Christchurch, my thoughts are with you all.
The loss of life was both sudden and tragic, profoundly affecting many people in New Zealand and around the world.
While there are many sad memories of that terrible time, there is also solace in remembering how your community rose to the challenge of rebuilding your lives and supporting each other.
You displayed great fortitude in the face of sudden, overwhelming loss.
Since that time you have continued to work to rebuild your city and your community, looking to a positive future.
My prayers are with all those marking today’s solemn anniversary.

Royal London Hospital, following terrorist bombs in London, 8 July 2005
Atrocities such as these simply reinforce our sense of community, our humanity, and our trust in the rule of law.
That is the clear message from us all.
Yesterday's bombings in London have deeply affected us all.
I know I speak for everyone in expressing my sympathy to those who have been caught up in these events and above all to the relatives and friends of those who have lost their lives.
My thoughts are also with the injured some of whom I have been able to see and talk to today.
I also want to thank you and all members of the emergency services and Transport for London who are working with such care, professionalism and sensitivity often in very difficult circumstances.
You have the respect of all of us as you go about your business.
Finally I want to express my admiration for the people of our capital city who in the aftermath of yesterday's bombings are calmly determined to resume their normal lives.
That is the answer to this outrage.
Sadly we in Britain have been all too familiar with acts of terror and members of my generation, especially at this end of London, know that we have been here before.
But those who perpetrate these brutal acts against innocent people should know that they will not change our way of life.
Opening the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, Nigeria, 5 December 2005
The Commonwealth is one of the great partnerships of the world where rich and poor, large and small, work together for the common good.
President Obasanjo, Mr. Secretary General, Ladies and Gentlemen,Thank you for your words of welcome.
Mr. President, this opening ceremony is an unmistakably African occasion and I am delighted to be back in this great continent of Africa which means so much to me and plays such an important part in the Commonwealth.
It is a particular pleasure to return to Nigeria after many years.
I thank you, Mr. President, for the warmth and hospitality which you and the Nigerian people have extended to Prince Philip and me during our visit.
Although the structure of these Commonwealth meetings has rightly evolved with the times, I would like to think that they retain their unique character.
It is not just a question of being able to communicate in the same language, but of being able to work in a family environment, of making decisions - sometimes difficult ones - by consensus, and of stimulating genuine dialogue at such meetings not only around the conference table but in less formal groups in the corridors and at the retreats.
I would also like to think that the organisation has been able to retain its fundamental principles and values, be they democracy, human rights and the rule of law, or gender equality, or sustainable development.
I have also been struck by the many examples of Commonwealth countries inviting the association to help them constructively to resolve political problems and to meet the challenges of development.
That is the most eloquent testimony possible to the confidence which members have in the organisation.
Moreover the Commonwealth is an example of multilateralism at work, allowing all its members whatever their size or level of development to have their voices heard in the concert of nations.
Ladies and Gentlemen, you are meeting here at a time when old as well as new challenges confront us.
Poverty, hunger, environmental degradation, the scourge of HIV/AIDS, the lack of educational opportunities, are all among the legacies which the world has not been able to overcome.
They continue to threaten global stability, just as the menace of terrorism and unresolved conflicts pose new and sinister challenges to it.
The Millennium Development Goals still remain a distant objective.
The theme of your meeting, Development and Democracy: Partnership for Peace and Prosperity, captures imperatives that are central to the Commonwealth.
Democracy gives people a choice in how they are governed, and those in Government rule with the consent of their people.
Underdevelopment is one of the greatest threats to democracy; the one cannot be sustained without the other.
Your theme also talks of partnership.
The Commonwealth is one of the great partnerships of the world where rich and poor, large and small, work together for the common good.
This partnership remains crucial not just for peace and prosperity within the Commonwealth, but in the wider world.
It puts our association in a strong position to meet the pressing challenges of our time: eradicating poverty, creating a fair and open trade environment, bridging the digital divide, combating terrorism and building a more peaceful world for us all.
This is a daunting agenda, but I know that you will address these difficult issues with a serious sense of purpose and in a family spirit which have become the hallmarks of these meetings.
Your decisions can make a real difference to people's lives and I hope the Commonwealth will emerge reinvigorated from Abuja to reaffirm its prominent place on the international stage.
Christmas Broadcast 2003
Separation at this time is especially hard to bear.
In 2003 many British servicemen and women were stationed in Iraq.
The Queen's Christmas Broadcast that year was recorded entirely on location at Combermere Barracks in Windsor, the first time in the history of the broadcast that an outside location was used for the message.
The theme of the message was teamwork, and recognition of the professionalism of the Armed Services, and of voluntary services.
I am sure that most of you will be celebrating Christmas at home in the company of your families and friends, but I know that some of you will not be so lucky.
This year I am speaking to you from the Household Cavalry Barracks in Windsor because I want to draw attention to the many Servicemen and women who are stationed far from home this Christmas.
I am thinking about their wives and children, and about their parents and friends.
Separation at this time is especially hard to bear.
It is not just a matter of separation.
The men and women of the Services continue to face serious risks and dangers as they carry out their duties.
They have done this brilliantly.
I think we all have very good reasons for feeling proud of their achievements - both in war, and as they help to build a lasting peace in troublespots across the globe.
None of this can be achieved without paying a price.
I know that all our thoughts at this time are with the families who are suffering the pain of bereavement.
All those who have recently lost a close relative or friend will know how difficult Christmas can be.
These individual Servicemen and women are our neighbours and come from our own towns and villages; from every part of the country and from every background.
The process of training within the Navy, the Army and the Air Force has moulded them together into disciplined teams.
They have learnt to take responsibility and to exercise judgement and restraint in situations of acute stress and danger.
They have brought great credit to themselves and to our country as a whole.
I had an opportunity recently at the Barracks to meet some of those who played their part with such distinction in the Iraq operations.
I was left with a deep sense of respect and admiration for their steadfast loyalty to each other and to our nation.
I believe there is a lesson for us all here.
It is that each of us can achieve much more if we work together as members of a team.
The Founder of the Christian Faith himself chose twelve disciples to help him in his ministry.
I was reminded of the importance of teamwork as I presented, for the first time last summer, The Queen's Awards for Voluntary Service by groups within the community.
I have been struck by how often people say to me that they are receiving their award on behalf of a team and that they do not deserve to be singled out.
This annual award recognises the team rather than the individual.
In this country and throughout the Commonwealth there are groups of people who are giving their time generously to make a difference to the lives of others.
As we think of them, and of our Servicemen and women far from home at this Christmas time, I hope we all, whatever our faith, can draw inspiration from the words of the familiar prayer:"Teach us good Lord
	To serve thee as thou deservest;
	To give, and not to count the cost;
	To fight, and not to heed the wounds;
	To toil, and not to seek for rest;
	To labour, and not to ask for any reward;
	Save that of knowing that we do thy will.
"It is this knowledge which will help us all to enjoy the Festival of Christmas.
The Queen's 2020 Commonwealth Day Message
Such a blend of traditions serves to make us stronger, individually and collectively, by providing the ingredients needed for social, political and economic resilienceOn Commonwealth occasions, it is always inspiring to be reminded of the diversity of the people and countries that make up our worldwide family.
We are made aware of the many associations and influences that combine through Commonwealth connection, helping us to imagine and deliver a common future.
This is particularly striking when we see people from nations, large and small, gathering for the Commonwealth Games, for meetings of Commonwealth governments, and on Commonwealth Day.
Such a blend of traditions serves to make us stronger, individually and collectively, by providing the ingredients needed for social, political and economic resilience.
Throughout my life, I have had the opportunity to see and hear how membership of the Commonwealth family means so much to those living in all parts of the world, often in places that are quite remote.
Advances in technology and modern media have now enabled many more people to witness and enjoy - with remarkable immediacy - this experience of Commonwealth connection, in areas such as education, medicine and conservation.
Looking to the future, this connectivity means we are also aware, perhaps as never before, that wherever we live, our choices and actions affect the well-being of people and communities living far away, and in very different circumstances.
For many, this awareness awakens a desire to employ our planet’s natural resources with greater care, and it is encouraging to see how the countries of the Commonwealth continue to devise new ways of working together to achieve prosperity, whilst protecting our planet.
As members of this very special community, on this Commonwealth Day, I hope that the people and countries of the Commonwealth will be inspired by all that we share, and move forward with fresh resolve to enhance the Commonwealth’s influence for good in our world.
National Assembly for Wales, 5 June 2003
It is vital to the health both of the United Kingdom and of Wales that our democratic institutions flourish and adapt.
Presiding Officer, Members of the National Assembly for Wales,I am most grateful for this invitation to speak here again and to have this opportunity to address those Members newly elected to this, the Second National Assembly of Wales.
I am delighted to be able to do so at this early moment of your term of office and to congratulate you on your election last month.
The theme of the celebration in St Mary's, which I was pleased to attend with you earlier today, was the importance of bridge-building in leadership.
That celebration itself spanned different faith communities and religious traditions.
This theme, exemplified by the text taken from one of the greatest works of early Welsh prose, is as important for leaders today as it was in the past.
Bridges span divides; they unite people.
As elected Members, these are roles which you fulfil.
The essence of representative democracy is that elected Members are the means by which the wishes and needs of the citizen are articulated to government at all levels on those matters for which they are responsible.
You are bridges between the people and the devolved government of Wales.
It is easier to perform that role when the electorate can recognise that its representatives mirror the wider society.
How proud you must all be that this new Assembly is the first legislative body in Europe, and perhaps the world, to have equal numbers of women and men among its members.
Another impressive feature of this Chamber has always been from the start your commitment to accountability and transparency through electronic communication and the broadcasting of your proceedings.
I know that the way you have addressed this commitment has stimulated interest in other and older parliaments both within the United Kingdom and the wider Commonwealth.
These are eye-catching and important ways in which the Assembly is breaking new ground, but we must always remember any new constitutional organisation takes time to settle and deliver.
This Assembly is still a young institution but is already making its mark.
The steps towards devolution enacted at the very end of the twentieth century, including the establishment of the National Assembly for Wales, are now defined features of the political landscape of the United Kingdom.
They are being accommodated and embraced within that vital and sustaining structure shaped by centuries of pragmatic evolution which we know as the British Constitution.
I, for my part, would like to take this opportunity to assure you all of my continuing interest in the work of this Assembly and the essential role which it increasingly plays in decisions on resources and legislation in those matters which directly affect the lives of the people of Wales.
It is vital to the health both of the United Kingdom and of Wales that our democratic institutions flourish and adapt.
The process of election is the fundamental means by which every elector can participate in this business of government.
I share your concerns that everyone must be encouraged to exercise their rights as voters.
This is a real challenge now before us all.
RS Thomas once wrote, "life is not hurrying into a receding future, nor hankering after an imagined past".
Members of the National Assembly for Wales, this is your time to be the bridges between the devolved government and the people of this ancient and beautiful land.
I hope and pray that you will continue to debate vigorously, to deliberate wisely, and to work always for the common good.
State Banquet held in the Zeughaus, Berlin, Germany, 2 November 2004
Each time I return to Berlin I marvel at the changes.
Mr.
President, Ladies and Gentlemen,Thank you, Mr. President for your warm words of welcome.
Each time I return to Berlin I marvel at the changes.
When I came last I saw the restoration of the Reichstag and tomorrow I shall see how British architects are helping to remould Museum Island.
Britain's part in Berlin's reemergence as one of the world's great cities is a source of pride for me.
Berlin symbolises the remarkable achievement of German re-unification; the British contribution to your skyline also symbolises the reconciliation between our two countries.
My admiration for your achievements is not limited to Berlin.
The reconstruction of the Frauenkirche in Dresden is an inspiration to us all.
I recall in particular the moment at Windsor Castle in 1998 when Prince Philip and I stood beside President and Frau Herzog to see the new orb and cross for the first time.
At the Berlin Philharmonic tomorrow night we shall renew our support for this cause so full of powerful symbolism.
And in remembering the appalling suffering of war on both sides, we recognise how precious is the peace we have built in Europe since 1945.
It is difficult for someone of my generation to over-emphasise this.
And one of the bedrocks of that peace has been the partnership between our two countries within NATO and the European Union which grew so successfully out of the need to address together the challenges of the post war world.
We owe it to those who built that partnership to continue the process into the twenty-first century: to learn from history not be obsessed by it; to look beyond simplistic stereotypes to realise how often we share the same outlook; above all to recognise the way in which that vital partnership of the post-war years has evolved - and continues to evolve - into a mature and enduring friendship for the twenty-first century.
I hope that this State Visit to Germany can highlight one or two of the ways this is happening - looking to the future in our bilateral relations, in Europe and in meeting the global challenges ahead.
Mr.
President, stereotypes wither in the face of human contact, and we should continue to encourage our young people to know more about each others' countries.
I am pleased that our two governments are actively looking at new ways to promote these contacts and I hope to see something of this whilst I am here.
As part of this young Germans may realize that one legacy of Britain's history is our diversity; we regard it as a strength.
We believe the same is true for the European Union.
Britain and Germany have long advocated enlargement of the Union, as vital for Europe's prosperity and security.
Both our countries also recognise that Europe's enlargement alone will not guarantee our future prosperity; we need to find new ways to ensure Europe remains competitive.
I look forward to seeing how we are working together in the fields of commerce, science and technology to achieve this.
At a global level one new and urgent challenge we face together is climate change.
Tomorrow I shall be present at the opening of the German-British conference on this subject at the British Embassy.
I am pleased that Britain and Germany are leaders in Europe on this issue.
The presentation I saw by young British and German students today underscored how important this issue is to the next generation.
This is what our twenty-first century relationship means, working together in friendship - instinctively, quietly and effectively - in our common interests and for our children's future.
I hope that my visit helps us all to recognise it.
And speaking for myself as I have witnessed in my own lifetime our progress from war to peace, from partnership to friendship, I believe we should celebrate it too.
Millennium Point, Birmingham, 2 July 2002
I have no doubt that you will use this building to inspire the next generation who will shape the technology and industry of tomorrow.
It gives me great pleasure to open Millennium Point today.
On my visits to the West Midlands I am always struck by the vitality of the traditions of invention and industriousness.
Of course you are celebrating history here, right down to the nuts and bolts.
This region was central to Britain's industrial revolution.
Queen Victoria, when she was a young princess, wrote a vivid passage in her diary the first time that she saw the buildings and landscapes of the West Midlands which bore the marks of coal and steam.
That was in 1832.
But as you move on, you use pride in your heritage to embrace change.
There is the National Exhibition Centre, the National Indoor Arena, a world-famous symphony orchestra, and you have built your own strong links to the markets of continental Europe and to the wider world.
Vigorous change is neither confined to Birmingham nor to cities alone.
Financial and service industries are now among the most important economic activities in the West Midlands as a whole, and the countryside makes a significant contribution to the economy here in this heart of England.
During this week's visit Prince Philip and I are seeing something of the diversity of this region, although of course there are many areas it was not possible to fit in this time.
Today we have seen the regenerated centre of Solihull, and this building is another example of imaginative renewal of an urban environment.
Tomorrow, in contrast, we will visit the Royal Show, which is the largest outdoor rural business event of its kind in the world.
Prince Philip will also sample what can safely be described as a distinctive flavour of the region at the Marmite factory which is celebrating its centenary.
Golden Jubilee visit to Liverpool, 25 July 2002
I am glad to be in Merseyside, which must be one of the most distinctive and energetic parts of the United Kingdom.
Lord Mayor, Ladies and Gentlemen,Thank you for your welcome.
It is always a pleasure for Prince Philip and me to visit the North West; and I am glad to be in Merseyside, which must be one of the most distinctive and energetic parts of the United Kingdom.
Indeed the whole region is a powerhouse of creativity, building on a remarkable heritage of innovation.
The relationship between Merseyside and Greater Manchester, once tense, is now more confident.
You work together more, whether on the Commonwealth Games or on the bid for Capital of Culture.
There will of course always be a certain degree of competition.
You enjoy three major orchestras, and a clutch of world-class museums and galleries.
As Liverpool's two great church leaders of the 1980s and nineties knew and preached, "it's better together".
I remember travelling in 1977 between your two great Cathedrals, down Hope Street, and seeing how communities can come together.
There are I am sure wider lessons to be learned from Liverpool's experience at that time.
The North West embraces more than great cities.
Across Cheshire, as I saw yesterday, and across Lancashire and Cumbria, stretch rural communities whose way of life has been essential to the development of both the economy and the character of the North West; and who over the last two years have been buffeted by enormous challenges to both the tourism and farming industries.
I look forward to my visits to Lancashire and Cumbria later on.
I can think of no better showcase for the region than this evening's opening of the Commonwealth Games in Manchester, the second largest sports event after the Olympics, which I have no doubt will bring great credit to the region, and to all of those who are participating, in whatever form - whether as competitors, spectators, or volunteers - with such enthusiasm.
But above all, I wanted to express my gratitude to all those of you who over many years have offered me much friendship and loyalty.
I have been fortunate enough to meet people from so many different backgrounds during my visits.
Opening of the Commonwealth Heads of Government, Australia, 2 March 2002
It is our very diversity which makes the Commonwealth strong.
Mr Prime Minister, Mr Secretary General, President Mbeki, Ladies and Gentlemen,I am very pleased to be with you today in Coolum.
I am delighted that this meeting takes place in Australia, one of the Commonwealth's founding members.
I know it was originally planned to coincide with the Centenary of Federation last year, but that is still recent enough for us to congratulate the people of this country on that major milestone in their history.
May I thank you, Mr Prime Minister, for the warm welcome we have all received in Australia.
May I also express my best wishes to you, Mr Secretary General, as you embark on your important responsibilities at this your first Heads of Government Meeting in your present post, although you are of course no stranger to Commonwealth meetings.
I hope that these summits provide us all with an opportunity, every two years or so, to stand back form our daily preoccupations and consider what binds our nations together.
We all know that the Commonwealth evolved not from an architect's drawing board, but out of history, to form a free partnership of nations.
It is an organisation which had defined its own values and ideals and its particular focus on issues important to us all, notably sustainable development and good governance.
It has also developed its own style - of informality, tolerance, and an insistence on bringing all along together on the sometimes difficult path of building consensus.
And this tradition of consensus is in spite of the remarkable variety of its members.
Every region of the world is represented, every size of nation at all stages of development, and all the world's religions are here.
It is our very diversity which makes the Commonwealth strong.
I also believe that it is this diversity which makes the Commonwealth so increasingly relevant in our twenty-first century world.
The events of 11th September have reminded us all of the need to build bridges between different cultures based on greater knowledge and understanding of our differences.
And there is another reason, closer to home.
Our own countries are rarely homogeneous.
Most of us today live in societies which embrace different traditions and cultures.
This is an increasingly important part of modern life, with more and easier travel the world over.
National success can often be judges by the success with which we deal with differences.
It is against this background that your meeting must deal with the challenges facing this organisation.
You have a number of important and immediate issues.
You also have the task of defining its longer-term future, following the decision at Durban three years ago to set in train the High Level Review.
The Commonwealth must move with the times if it is to remain relevant to all generations.
Finally may I thank you, Mr Prime Minister, Mr Secretary-General and President Mbeki for you kind words about my fifty years as Head of the Commonwealth.
In this time I have seen this organisation grow steadily both in numbers and in significance.
I remember with much pleasure the friendships I have enjoyed with leaders from every part of the Commonwealth, some of them stretching over many years.
I recall too the very many happy visits to your countries, and the opportunities that have given me to marvel at new developments as well as to draw inspiration from old traditions.
Great openings such as this, dinners, ceremonies and inaugurations there have been aplenty; they are important ways of celebrating progress and marking major occasions.
But it is the contact with the people of your many countries which has given me particular personal satisfaction.
For it is because so many people from every walk of life value this extraordinary community of ours, whether through shared development projects, or professional Commonwealth associations, or distance learning drawing on our common English language, or tourism, or our sporting links such as the Commonwealth Games later this year, that the Commonwealth has such a deep meaning for me.
It brings people together and enriches lives.
As long as we never lose sight of the goal, I am as sure of the future as I am proud of the past of this great organisation which it has been my privilege to serve since 1952.
The Queen's speech on awarding Sir David Attenborough the Chatham House Prize
Your ability to communicate the beauty and vulnerability of our natural environment remains unequalled As Patron of the Royal Institute of International Affairs, I am delighted that members have awarded this year’s Chatham House Prize to Sir David Attenborough and the Blue Planet Two team.
Sir David, this award recognises your many talents and one can’t help but feel that, for those of us of a certain generation, we can take great pleasure in proving age is no barrier to being a positive influence.
Your ability to communicate the beauty and vulnerability of our natural environment remains unequalled as you – and your team – have engaged and enthused many people, young and old, to appreciate and preserve our world’s oceans.
For that we should all be thankful.
Christmas Broadcast 2001
 For Christmas marks a moment to pause, to reflect and believe in the possibilities of rebirth and renewal.
The year 2001 saw large-scale terrorist attacks on New York and Washington, killing around 3,000 people, the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease in the UK's farming community, and famine in Sudan.
The Queen's Christmas Broadcast for that year stressed the importance of communities working to respond to problems and disasters together.
For many people all over the world, the year 2001 seems to have brought them more than their fair share of trials and disasters.
There have been storms and droughts as well as epidemics and famine.
And this country has not been spared, with the floods this time last year, and Foot and Mouth, which has had such devastating consequences for our farmers and rural communities.
They and others whose livelihoods have been affected continue to suffer hardship and anxiety long after the newspaper headlines have moved on.
But whilst many of these events were of natural origin, it was the human conflicts and the wanton acts of crime and terror against fellow human beings which have so appalled us all.
The terrorist outrages in the United States last September brought home to us the pain and grief of ordinary people the world over who find themselves innocently caught up in such evil.
During the following days we struggled to find ways of expressing our horror at what had happened.
As so often in our lives at times of tragedy - just as on occasions of celebration and thanksgiving - we look to the Church to bring us together as a nation or as a community in commemoration and tribute.
It is to the Church that we turn to give meaning to these moments of intense human experience through prayer, symbol and ceremony.
In these circumstances so many of us, whatever our religion, need our faith more than ever to sustain and guide us.
Every one of us needs to believe in the value of all that is good and honest; we need to let this belief drive and influence our actions.
All the major faiths tell us to give support and hope to others in distress.
We in this country have tried to bring comfort to all those who were bereaved, or who suffered loss or injury in September's tragic events through those moving services at St Paul's and more recently at Westminster Abbey.
On these occasions and during the countless other acts of worship during this past year, we came together as a community - of relations, friends and neighbours - to draw strength in troubled times from those around us.
I believe that strong and open communities matter both in good times as well as bad.
Certainly they provide a way of helping one another.
I would like to pay tribute to so many of you who work selflessly for others in your neighbourhood needing care and support.
Communities also give us an important sense of belonging, which is a compelling need in all of us.
We all enjoy moments of great happiness and suffer times of profound sadness; the happiness is heightened, the sadness softened when it is shared.
But there is more than that.
A sense of belonging to a group, which has in common the same desire for a fair and ordered society, helps to overcome differences and misunderstanding by reducing prejudice, ignorance and fear.
We all have something to learn from one another, whatever our faith - be it Christian or Jewish, Muslim, Buddhist, Hindu or Sikh - whatever our background, whether we be young or old, from town or countryside.
This is an important lesson for us all during this festive season.
For Christmas marks a moment to pause, to reflect and believe in the possibilities of rebirth and renewal.
Christ's birth in Bethlehem so long ago remains a powerful symbol of hope for a better future.
After all the tribulations of this year, this is surely more relevant than ever.
As we come together amongst family and friends and look forward to the coming year, I hope that in the months to come we shall be able to find ways of strengthening our own communities as a sure support and comfort to us all - whatever may lie ahead.
Christmas Broadcast 1990
 I hope that all of us lucky enough to be able to enjoy such gatherings this Christmas will take time to count our blessings.
The Queen's Christmas Message in 1990 paid tribute to the role of the Armed Services in the context of imminent war in the Arabian Gulf.
Over the years, I have dwelt on the happier side of life in my Christmas Broadcasts - we need reminding of it, particularly at Christmas time.
This year, there have been, I hope, times of happiness and good cheer for most of us.
My family, for instance, has been celebrating my mother's Ninetieth Birthday, and we have shared with you the joy of some of those celebrations.
My youngest grandchild's christening, two days ago, has brought the family together once again.
I hope that all of us lucky enough to be able to enjoy such gatherings this Christmas will take time to count our blessings.
For it seems to me that there is one deep and overriding anxiety for us all on which we should reflect today.
That is the threat of war in the Middle East.
The servicemen in the Gulf who are spending Christmas at their posts under this threat are much in our thoughts.
And there are many others, at home and abroad, servicemen and civilians, who are away from their own firesides.
Wherever they are, may they all, when their duty is done, soon be reunited with their families safe and sound.
At the same time we must remember those still held hostage.
Some of them have spent years in captivity, and Christmas must, for them, be especially hard to bear.
My heart goes out to them and to their families.
We can, at least, rejoice at the safe return of many of their compatriots over the last weeks, and salute the courage which they have shown.
Wars, threats of wars and civil disturbance inevitably cause thousands of innocent people to become refugees and to have their lives ruined or disrupted.
It is difficult for us, safe at home, to contemplate the scale of the suffering for homeless and hungry people caused by the ever-widening consequences of the crisis in the Gulf.
The invasion of Kuwait was an example on an international scale of an evil which has beset us at different levels in recent years - attempts by ruthless people to impose their will on the peaceable majority.
In extreme form, as we know only too well, these attempts lead to disaster and death, and their tragic aftermath for families and communities.
In the United Kingdom, we have suffered once again during the past year from the scourge of terrorism, its disregard for human life and its efforts to dress its crimes in political clothes.
But all this is nothing new.
The tributes we paid last summer to the heroes of Dunkirk and the Battle of Britain were tributes to their achievement in repelling a determined invader.
That was fifty years ago.
Nowadays there are all too many causes that press their claims with a loud voice and a strong arm rather than with the language of reason.
We must not allow ourselves to be too discouraged as we confront them.
Let us remember that Christ did not promise the earth to the powerful.
The resolve of those who endure and resist these activities should not be underestimated.
I never cease to admire the stoical courage of those in Northern Ireland, for example, who go about their business in defiance of the terrorist.
The reaction of those who have lost loved ones at violent hands is often an inspiration to the rest of us.
Then again, I, like many others, was much heartened by the virtually unanimous opposition of the international community to the unprovoked invasion of Kuwait, and by the speed with which moves were made to try to relieve the plight of the innocent victims.
I want, therefore, to say thank you today to the men and women who, day in and day out, carry on their daily life in difficult and dangerous circumstances.
By just getting on with the job, they are getting the better of those who want to harm our way of life.
Let us think of them this Christmas, wherever they are in the world, and pray that their resolution remains undiminished.
It is they and their kind who, by resisting the bully and the tyrant, ensure that we live in the sort of world in which we can celebrate this season safely with our families.
I pray also that we may all be blessed with something of their spirit.
Then we would find it easier to solve our disputes in peace and justice, wherever they occur, and that inheritance of the earth which Christ promised, not to the strong, but to the meek, would be that much closer.
State Banquet in Singapore, 17 March 2006
The links between Britain and Singapore are as strong as ever, and our future relationship is bright indeed.
Your Excellency,Thank you for your warm words of welcome and it is a pleasure for me to be in Singapore again.
Today both Prince Philip and I have been able to see the immense changes since my last State Visit.
As in the past, we have enjoyed the warm and friendly hospitality of your people.
Singaporeans young and old have been gracious and welcoming - we feel very much at home with you.
I have watched Singapore's development with admiration.
Although only forty years old, your country already has a deserved reputation as a centre of excellence in Asia.
Singapore has demonstrated an ability to develop and grow, while preserving the best of its traditions.
From inventive architecture and dynamic culture to cutting-edge technology, you have maintained solid foundations while always building for the future.
I saw today your wonderful new National Library and Prince Philip visited your science centre at Biopolis.
Both are world-class facilities.
Britain has been a close friend of Singapore for almost two hundred years.
We are proud of our historical and Commonwealth links and as we look to the future we share a common vision of the societies we would like for our young people - safe, environmentally friendly and full of opportunity.
I am pleased that over one hundred and twenty thousand of your young people are undertaking the National Youth Achievement Award.
Our political, defence and trading ties go from strength to strength.
We have a shared belief in strengthening international action, including the fight against both terrorism and the spread of weapons of mass destruction, and our partnership in the Five Power Defence Arrangements remains relevant to the modern security concerns in the region.
Our respective economies are closely linked.
Britain is the largest investor in Singapore and we in turn welcome the majority of your investment in the European Union.
Britain trades more with Singapore than with many other far larger economies in the world.
And we have common interests in the challenges and opportunities of globalisation.
This partnership is extending into new areas such as science, engineering and technology.
Your Excellency, I believe the real strength behind our relationship lies with our people.
Many British and Singaporean citizens have first-hand experience of each other's country.
We continue to benefit from thousands of Singaporeans studying at our universities.
Our young people share the same passions.
Sport is one of these and I was pleased to see so many young Singaporean athletes earlier this week at the Commonwealth Games in Melbourne.
I hope also that we will see many more of your athletes at the 2012 Olympic Games to be staged in London - a decision so memorably for us taken here in Singapore last summer.
Prince Philip will meet some of these young sportsmen and sportswomen during his visit to the Singapore Sports School tomorrow.
These links between people are becoming even more important in our shrinking world.
We both have multi-racial and multicultural societies and we value community cohesion.
In Toa Payoh Town today I saw how well this is working in Singapore, where people of different races and religions understand each other and live side-by-side.
We can learn a great deal from each other.
Your Excellency, the links between Britain and Singapore are as strong as ever, and our future relationship is bright indeed.
We are natural partners in so many ways and I firmly believe this will continue and strengthen in the years ahead.
Ladies and Gentlemen, it is in that spirit of partnership that I ask you to rise and drink a toast to:
Christmas Broadcast 2004
Everyone is our neighbour, no matter what race, creed or colour.
In her Christmas Broadcast of 2004 The Queen addressed the theme of religious tolerance.
Christmas is for most of us a time for a break from work, for family and friends, for presents, turkey and crackers.
But we should not lose sight of the fact that these are traditional celebrations around a great religious festival, one of the most important in the Christian year.
Religion and culture are much in the news these days, usually as sources of difference and conflict, rather than for bringing people together.
But the irony is that every religion has something to say about tolerance and respecting others.
For me as a Christian one of the most important of these teachings is contained in the parable of the Good Samaritan, when Jesus answers the question "who is my neighbour".
It is a timeless story of a victim of a mugging who was ignored by his own countrymen but helped by a foreigner - and a despised foreigner at that.
The implication drawn by Jesus is clear.
Everyone is our neighbour, no matter what race, creed or colour.
The need to look after a fellow human being is far more important than any cultural or religious differences.
Most of us have learned to acknowledge and respect the ways of other cultures and religions, but what matters even more is the way in which those from different backgrounds behave towards each other in everyday life.
It is vitally important that we all should participate and cooperate for the sake of the wellbeing of the whole community.
We have only to look around to recognise the benefits of this positive approach in business or local government, in sport, music and the arts.
There is certainly much more to be done and many challenges to be overcome.
Discrimination still exists.
Some people feel that their own beliefs are being threatened.
Some are unhappy about unfamiliar cultures.
They all need to be reassured that there is so much to be gained by reaching out to others; that diversity is indeed a strength and not a threat.
We need also to realise that peaceful and steady progress in our society of differing cultures and heritage can be threatened at any moment by the actions of extremists at home or by events abroad.
We can certainly never be complacent.
But there is every reason to be hopeful about the future.
I certainly recognise that much has been achieved in my lifetime.
I believe tolerance and fair play remain strong British values and we have so much to build on for the future.
It was for this reason that I particularly enjoyed a story I heard the other day about an overseas visitor to Britain who said the best part of his visit had been travelling from Heathrow into Central London on the tube.
His British friends were, as you can imagine, somewhat surprised, particularly as the visitor had been to some of the great attractions of the country.
What do you mean they asked?Because, he replied, I boarded the train just as the schools were coming out.
At each stop children were getting on and off - they were of every ethnic and religious background, some with scarves or turbans, some talking quietly, others playing and occasionally misbehaving together - completely at ease and trusting one another.
How lucky you are, said the visitor, to live in a country where your children can grow up this way.
I hope they will be allowed to enjoy this happy companionship for the rest of their lives.
Presentation of a Royal Charter to the University of Manchester, 22 October 2004
In creating this new institution, you are building on a rich academic heritage and a fine tradition of excellence in both teaching and research.
Co-Chancellors, Ladies and Gentlemen,Thank you for inviting me here today.
My family has enjoyed a long association with two institutions that have come together to create this powerful new force in higher education.
The Victoria University of Manchester was, of course, named in honour of Queen Victoria and I have visited the University on a number of occasions over the past fifty years in my role as Visitor.
My most recent visit was two years ago when I was able to see for myself the magnificent contribution that the two universities made to the very successful Commonwealth Games hosted by the city in 2002.As we have heard from the President and Vice-Chancellor, the creation of the new University represents a bold and imaginative response to the challenges facing higher education.
In creating this new institution, you are building on a rich academic heritage and a fine tradition of excellence in both teaching and research.
By combining the talents of two such highly rated institutions, I feel sure that you will be able to take advantage of a more powerful academic position, not only in the United Kingdom, but across the world.
I offer you, Co-Chancellors, President and Vice-Chancellor and all your staff my good wishes as you build your new institution and take advantage of the challenges and opportunities that lie ahead.
Commonwealth Day Message, 11 March 2013
let us bear in mind the great opportunity that is offered by the Commonwealth – of joining with others, stronger together, for the common good.
This year’s Commonwealth theme, ‘Opportunity through Enterprise’, is a celebration of our achievements, particularly those that may have seemed challenging, daunting or even impossible, which have helped to build strength, resilience and pride in our young people, in our communities and in our nations.
Great achievements in human history have a number of common characteristics.
From climbing the highest mountain, to winning a sporting competition, making a scientific breakthrough, building a successful business or discovering unique artistic talent – these outcomes all begin as a simple goal or idea in one person’s mind.
We are all born with the desire to learn, to explore, to try new things.
And each of us can think of occasions when we have been inspired to do something more efficiently, or to assist others in achieving their full potential.
Yet it still takes courage to launch into the unknown.
Ambition and curiosity open new avenues of opportunity.
That is what lies at the heart of our Commonwealth approach: individuals and communities finding ways to strive together to create a better future that is beneficial for all.
Our shared values of peace, democracy, development, justice and human rights – which are found in our new ‘Commonwealth Charter’ – mean that we place special emphasis on including everyone in this goal, especially those who are vulnerable.
A speech by The Queen at the opening of a memorial fountain to the late Diana, Princess of Wales
You have given the Park, at the very heart of our capital city that Diana knew so well, a highly original memorial which captures something of the essence of a remarkable human being.
Secretary of State, Lord Spencer, Ladies and Gentlemen,It is sometimes difficult to believe that it is now nearly seven years since we heard the news that Diana, Princess of Wales had been killed in a car crash in Paris.
Certainly the days that followed are etched on my memory as we as a family and nation came to terms with the loss, united by an extraordinary sense of shock, grief and sadness.
By any standard Diana's tragic death held the attention of the world.
Central to this remains the extraordinary effect Diana had on those around her.
Her drive to empathise with those in difficulty, hardship or distress, her willingness to embrace a new cause, her shrewd ability to size up all those she met, allowed her not only to touch people's lives but to change them.
This is her wider legacy.
But I cannot forget - and nor can those of us here today who knew her much more personally, as sister, wife, mother, or daughter-in-law - the Diana who made such an impact on our lives.
Of course there were difficult times, but memories mellow with the passing of the years.
I remember especially the happiness she gave to my two grandsons.
Such memories are most people's memorials; the departed live on in those they have helped to shape in life.
But for some exceptional people there is a need for something more, a permanent and more public recognition.
Creating a memorial to Diana has been no easy task.
To present a likeness seemed at best unnecessary for someone whose image continues to exert such a fascination the world over.
To find some other way to capture her spirit has been the challenge.
I congratulate those who have created the memorial before us.
I thank both the design team for the imagination which they have brought to this project and those who have realised their concept with such care and craftsmanship.
I believe that you have given the Park, at the very heart of our capital city that Diana knew so well, a highly original memorial which captures something of the essence of a remarkable human beingI think Diana would have enjoyed it; and I believe she would want all of us to do so too.
Hôtel De Ville in Toulouse, French State Visit, 7 April 2004
Links between Britain and Toulouse have existed over many centuries.
M. le Maire, Mme Chirac, M. le Préfet, Mesdames, Messieurs,It gives me great pleasure to be with you here today.
Links between Britain and Toulouse have existed over many centuries, from the Crusades to the Hundred Years' War, and from the city's golden age in the 16th century as an international centre of the textile trade to its place today as a global centre of the aerospace industry.
And as our countries celebrate the hundredth anniversary of the Entente Cordiale, I celebrate the fact that the Battle of Toulouse in 1814 marked the last occasion on which our two nations fought each other on French soil.
I hope the Entente Cordiale celebrations will find a deep echo in Toulouse and its surrounding area.
British residents in Toulouse - many here today - are engaged in aerospace and related technologies, in other businesses of all kinds and in education.
And many people from this region are among the quarter of a million French citizens living, working and studying in the United Kingdom.
Toulouse is one of Europe's great university cities.
The French Foreign Minister who did so much to bring about the Entente Cordiale agreements, Théophile Delcassé, studied here.
I have appreciated the opportunity this morning to spend time at the remarkable Eglise des Jacobins, with students from the University of Toulouse and from the Entente Cordiale scholarship scheme for exchange students between our two countries.
The vitality, ideas and commitment of these young people are the corner stone on which the future of Europe is being built.
Your flagship aviation and space industries project the name of Toulouse across the world.
As we share your spirit of scientific discovery and technological progress, it is no coincidence that our countries made supersonic travel possible for the first time, and are such key players in Airbus.
I am greatly looking forward to my visit this afternoon.
Christmas Broadcast 1996
I remember my own childhood Christmases here, with my father and mother, and a great family gathering, and now I delight in seeing my children and grandchildren enjoying the same traditions.
The year 1996 saw historic visits by The Queen to Poland, the Czech Republic and Thailand, and a visit to the UK by President Nelson Mandela.
News events that year included two terrible massacres which shocked the world: a shooting in a school in Dunblane resulting in the deaths of 15 children and their teacher, and an attack in Port Arthur, Tasmania, which killed 35 people.
The Queen's Christmas Broadcast in 1996 addressed the theme of hope for the future.
To look back is not necessarily to be nostalgic.
When I come to Sandringham each year, I like to reflect on what Christmas must have been like when King Eward VII, my great-grandfather, and Queen Alexandra first came here as young parents.
I remember my own childhood Christmases here, with my father and mother, and a great family gathering, and now I delight in seeing my children and grandchildren enjoying the same traditions.
Christmas is the celebration of the birth of the founder of the Christian faith, an event which took place almost 2000 years ago; every year, at this time, we are asked to look back at that extraordinary story and remind ourselves of the message which inspired Christ's followers then, and which is just as relevant today.
At Christmas I enjoy looking back on some of the events of the year.
Many have their roots in history but still have a real point for us today.
I recall, especially, a dazzling spring day in Norwich when I attended the Maundy Service, the Cathedral providing a spectacular setting.
The lovely service is always a reminder of Christ's words to his disciples: "Love one another; as I have loved you".
It sounds so simple yet it proves so hard to obey.
In June came the Trooping the Colour, a vivid reminder of this country's proud military tradition, and of the discipline and dedication which our servicemen and women show in their taxing tasks of peace-keeping in many distant parts of the world.
Then, in October, I opened Parliament.
This is not just a State occasion, but also a symbol of the process of parliamentary democracy which we enjoy here in Britain, and in so many countries of the Commonwealth.
It is a process which seeks to express the ideal of the equality of all citizens under the law.
So, the past, with its traditions, has its lessons for us in 1996.
And this year, in our travels, Prince Philip and I have also been looking to the future.
I and all my family have always felt that one of our most important duties is to express, in our visits overseas, the goodwill of our country towards friends abroad, near and far.
So, last spring, we visited Poland and the Czech Republic, where we saw the development of democracy and prosperity in countries which only recently were communist-governed.
And everywhere we received the best of welcomes.
In the autumn we went to Thailand, where we renewed old friendships and witnessed the blending of tradition with a dynamic commercial spirit.
There was also a happy visit to this country by the President of France.
And I shall never forget the State Visit of President Mandela.
The most gracious of men has shown us all how to accept the facts of the past without bitterness, how to see new opportunities as more important than old disputes and how to look forward with courage and optimism.
His example is a continuing inspiration to the whole Commonwealth and to all those everywhere who work for peace and reconciliation.
This, I know, has been a difficult year for many families.
Discord, sickness, bereavement, even tragedy have touched all too many lives.
We recall, with sadness and bewilderment, the horror of Dunblane and Port Arthur.
We watch anxiously as violence threatens again to disrupt the lives of the people of Northern Ireland.
In difficult times, it is tempting for all of us, especially those who suffer, to look back and say "if only".
But to look back in that way is to look down a blind alley.
Better to look forward and say "if only".
If only we can live up to the example of the child who was born at Christmas with a love that came to embrace the whole world.
If only we can let him recapture for us that time when we faced the future with childhood's unbounded faith.
Armed with that faith, the New Year, with all its challenges and chances, should hold no terrors for us, and we should be able to embark upon it undaunted.
The Queen's Commonwealth Day Message, 2012
The Commonwealth offers a pathway for this greater understanding and the opportunity to expand upon our shared experiences in a wider world.
One of the great benefits of today’s technology-based world is the range of opportunities it offers to understand and appreciate how others live: we can see, hear and enter into the experience of people in communities and circumstances far removed from our own.
A remarkable insight we gain from such windows on the world is that, however different outward appearances may be, we share a great deal in common.
Our circumstances and surroundings may vary enormously, for example in the food we eat and the clothes we wear, but we share one humanity, and this draws us all together.
The joys of celebration and sympathy of sadness may be expressed differently but they are felt in the same way the world over.
How we express our identities reveals both a rich diversity and many common threads.
Through the creative genius of artists - whether they be writers, actors, film-makers, dancers or musicians - we can see both the range of our cultures and the elements of our shared humanity.
“Connecting Cultures”, our Commonwealth theme this year, encourages us to consider the special opportunities we have, as members of this unique gathering of nations, to celebrate an extraordinary cultural tapestry that reflects our many individual and collective identities.
The Commonwealth treasures and respects this wealth of diversity.
Connecting cultures is more, however, than observing others and the ways in which they express themselves.
This year, our Commonwealth focus seeks to explore how we can share and strengthen the bond of Commonwealth citizenship we already enjoy by using our cultural connections to help bring us even closer together, as family and friends across the globe.
To support this theme, a special song has been composed for the Commonwealth, ‘Stronger as One’.
There are any number of ways in which that single piece of music alone can be played or sung anywhere in the Commonwealth.
And by sharing the same music with our own personal interpretations and contributions, the wonderful human attribute of imagination is nourished, and we gain insights of understanding and appreciation of others.
A message from The Queen to President Obama following shocking events in Orlando.
Prince Philip and I have been shocked by the events in Orlando.
Our thoughts and prayers are with all those who have been affected.
Christmas Broadcast 2013
We are forever grateful to all those who put themselves at risk to keep us safe.
I once knew someone who spent a year in a plaster cast recovering from an operation on his back.
He read a lot, and thought a lot, and felt miserable.
Later, he realised this time of forced retreat from the world had helped him to understand the world more clearly.
We all need to get the balance right between action and reflection.
With so many distractions, it is easy to forget to pause and take stock.
Be it through contemplation, prayer, or even keeping a diary, many have found the practice of quiet personal reflection surprisingly rewarding, even discovering greater spiritual depth to their lives.
Reflection can take many forms.
When families and friends come together at Christmas, it’s often a time for happy memories and reminiscing.
Our thoughts are with those we have loved who are no longer with us.
We also remember those who through doing their duty cannot be at home for Christmas, such as workers in essential or emergency services.
And especially at this time of year we think of the men and women serving overseas in our armed forces.
We are forever grateful to all those who put themselves at risk to keep us safe.
Service and duty are not just the guiding principles of yesteryear; they have an enduring value which spans the generations.
I myself had cause to reflect this year, at Westminster Abbey, on my own pledge of service made in that great church on Coronation Day sixty years earlier.
The anniversary reminded me of the remarkable changes that have occurred since the Coronation, many of them for the better; and of the things that have remained constant, such as the importance of family, friendship and good neighbourliness.
But reflection is not just about looking back.
I and many others are looking forward to the Commonwealth Games in Glasgow next year.
The baton relay left London in October and is now the other side of the world, on its way across seventy nations and territories before arriving in Scotland next summer.
Its journey is a reminder that the Commonwealth can offer us a fresh view of life.
My son Charles summed this up at the recent meeting in Sri Lanka.
He spoke of the Commonwealth’s “family ties” that are a source of encouragement to many.
Like any family there can be differences of opinion.
But however strongly they’re expressed they are held within the common bond of friendship and shared experiences.
Here at home my own family is a little larger this Christmas.
As so many of you will know, the arrival of a baby gives everyone the chance to contemplate the future with renewed happiness and hope.
For the new parents, life will never be quite the same again!As with all who are christened, George was baptised into a joyful faith of Christian duty and service.
After the christening, we gathered for the traditional photograph.
It was a happy occasion, bringing together four generations.
In the year ahead, I hope you will have time to pause for moments of quiet reflection.
As the man in the plaster cast discovered, the results can sometimes be surprising.
For Christians, as for all people of faith, reflection, meditation and prayer help us to renew ourselves in God’s love, as we strive daily to become better people.
The Christmas message shows us that this love is for everyone.
There is no one beyond its reach.
On the first Christmas, in the fields above Bethlehem, as they sat in the cold of night watching their resting sheep, the local shepherds must have had no shortage of time for reflection.
Suddenly all this was to change.
These humble shepherds were the first to hear and ponder the wondrous news of the birth of Christ - the first noel - the joy of which we celebrate today.
Golden Jubilee gathering of Privileged Bodies, 21 March 2002
Privileged Bodies are held in great respect, not just in this country but throughout the world.
It is rare to have so many distinguished bodies represented together on one occasion.
I am pleased that by long-held tradition you come here to present your addresses on the occasion of my Golden Jubilee.
To the religious and spiritual bodies here, I give my wholehearted support to your determination to work for: a just and peaceful society; greater unity among all the Christian Churches; better understanding between Christians and people of other faiths; and the improvement of relations between all peoples.
You have voiced your determination to strive for tolerance, freedom and truth and to reach out to all, especially the poor, the isolated and the disadvantaged.
It gives me hope for the future that you will continue to support the spiritual life of this nation in this way.
In education, science and the arts you have, rightly, referred to the importance of: instilling a sense of duty and service in successive generations; searching for truth through teaching, scholarship and scientific enquiry; encouraging a spirit of learning and excellence, and promoting science and technology, architecture and the fine arts.
And there are many civic and other bodies represented today.
You all, in different ways, demonstrate how individuals can work together to serve their communities and this nation.
I congratulate all of you on the contribution you have made to our Nation over the last 50 years, and applaud your determination to continue your good works.
Privileged Bodies are held in great respect, not just in this country but throughout the world, and you represent a hope for the future securely grounded in experience of the past.
You represent a long history of merit, excellence and service.
A speech by The Queen to the Welsh Guards
No hundredth birthday greeting will give greater pleasure to deliver than the one I give to you, along with these New Colours today.
Major General Talbot Rice, Officers, Warrant Officers, Non-Commissioned Officers and Guardsmen of the Welsh Guards,This year I will send messages of congratulation to some eight thousand centenarians - born in the year 1915.
Every such message is special, but for me this year, no hundredth birthday greeting will give greater pleasure to deliver than the one I give to you, along with these New Colours today.
It has been nine years since I presented you with the Colours that have just been marched off parade.
Guardsmen who have served with the Regiment during those years, some of whom are no doubt here today, will have seen operational tours to Iraq, Bosnia, Kosovo and Afghanistan, interspersed with fire-fighting, state ceremonial and other public duties.
And I am speaking to those Guardsmen and indeed to each and every one of you assembled here today, when I say that I am proud of what you have achieved together.
It is the indomitable family spirit of the Welsh Guards that has been your hallmark.
I know too that the support and devotion of the Regimental family remains as strong as ever, including the many branches of the Regimental Association in Wales and elsewhere who work tirelessly to give care to those who need it.
And so, in this historic year for the Regiment, we celebrate your many achievements and remember with sad reflection the fallen and wounded of the world wars and of more recent conflicts.
I feel sure that these new Colours, which I look forward to seeing trooped on my Official Birthday in June, will inspire you and your successors to emulate the deeds of Welsh Guardsmen of the past hundred years, as you continue to serve our nation -- whether in conflict or in peace, at home and abroad.
Newspaper Society lunch, London, 26 March 2002
Your newspapers are an intrinsic part of the communities they serve, they give us a very special insight into what is going on around the country.
Mr.
President, Ladies and Gentlemen,Thank you, Mr. President, for your kind words of welcome and for inviting Prince Philip and myself to the Newspaper Society's Annual Lunch today.
We are delighted to have this opportunity to meet so many publishers of Britain's regional and local newspapers and their guests in this my Golden Jubilee year.
As your display today illustrates so well, the regional press have been covering Royal events assiduously for these past fifty years.
The pictures bring back many memories, and I look forward with great interest to seeing the Newspaper Society's collection of coverage of Royal Visits through the reign when it is published later this year.
On my visits to different parts of the United Kingdom since my Accession, it is the reporters and photographers from the regional press who turn out at all times and in all weathers to cover the story.
For each visit has a purpose, whether it is to celebrate an important event or activity, to raise the profile of a specific cause or organisation, or to recognise achievement and success.
These are more often than not local rather than national stories and the regional media, in recording these occasions, help to put into context the invaluable public and voluntary work being done day in and day out around the country.
But of course it is not just Royal visits that regional newspapers cover.
Because your newspapers are an intrinsic part of the communities they serve, they give us a very special insight into what is going on around the country.
With your hundreds of journalists who live and work in the towns and villages of Britain - and not just in London - the regional press is the medium which is well-placed to understand, and give such comprehensive coverage to, the day-to-day issues which affect people's lives most closely.
That is probably why regional newspapers are particularly trusted and why your readership is growing.
This traditional role of serving the community has never been more important than it is today.
It seems to me that people need a sense of community, a sense of belonging, now more than ever, and your newspapers help to meet that need.
The importance of local communities is something which I hope will be emphasised during the Golden Jubilee celebrations.
Prince Philip and I are touched by the warm support being shown by people across the country for the Jubilee and the news of events and celebrations that are now being planned for the coming months - from pigeon-racing to a hot-air balloon grand prix, and from children's painting competitions to the many village fetes and street parties.
All these events will bring people together.
We would like to think that a lasting legacy of this Jubilee for the future will be that communities across the country will have been strengthened and those who work for them, including your newspapers, will have been encouraged in their work.
My Golden Jubilee also gives us the opportunity to thank everyone who has given us such loyalty and encouragement since I came to the throne in 1952.
I much look forward to visiting your regions and localities during this Jubilee year and in the future, and I would like to take this opportunity to express my gratitude and appreciation to all of you who work in the regional media for your support.
Dinner at Parliament House in Canberra, 14 March 2006
Australia in the course of my lifetime has firmly established itself amongst the most respected nations of the world.
Prime Minister, Ladies and Gentlemen.
It is a great pleasure for Prince Philip and me to be back in Australia and in the home of your parliamentary democracy.
As Queen of Australia, I have always felt a special bond with a people whose creative energy and collective ambition is leavened by genuine warmth, generosity and humour.
By virtue of hard work and a competitive spirit, Australia is enjoying an era of unprecedented prosperity.
Yet the need to ensure that this prosperity touches the lives of all Australians is as powerful as ever.
At the same time this country has welcomed people from many nations and thrived on the diversity that has produced.
Even so, across this vast land there exists an undiminished recognition that communities must be built on values that transcend race, religion and culture.
For many indigenous Australians there remains much to be done, but I believe the unique contribution of indigenous Australia to the nation is better understood now than ever before.
I have always found Australians to have an instinctive urge to live and let live.
And yet you retain a truly global outlook and a proud record of defending freedom and democracy when it is threatened.
In recent years in dark times of crisis and emergency - whether by force of nature or at the hands of man - Australia has stepped forward as a source of strength and leadership.
I know all Australians are proud of the courage and professionalism of your defence personnel in the service of peace and in the fight against global terrorism.
More than ever Australia is an indispensable nation in times of humanitarian disasters.
The generous outpouring of assistance that followed the devastating Asian tsunami and last October's earthquake in Pakistan earned this country enormous respect around the world.
Across a whole range of endeavour, individual Australians continue to excel at home and abroad.
In November, I was pleased to present the inaugural Queen's Medal for Music to the Australian conductor, Sir Charles Mackerras, one of the greatly loved musicians of our time.
Last year, the world learned the inspiring story of the Australian Nobel Prize winners, Barry Marshall and Robin Warren.
And in coming days, I have no doubt that the Commonwealth Games in Melbourne will only add to Australia's reputation not only for winning world-class sporting events but also for hosting them with flair, sophistication and hospitality.
Yet for all the stars nurtured under the Southern Cross, it is one of the truly admirable Australian traits to honour those who go about their essential business without fuss or media attention.
On visits down the years, I have had the privilege of meeting many of them, including indigenous entrepreneurs and artists, outback educators, charity workers and volunteer firefighters.
It is through the deeds and dedication of these quiet achievers that the spirit of Australia finds its highest expression.
Of all this and much more, Ladies and Gentlemen, I believe the people of Australia can be justly proud.
It is perhaps difficult for many of you, under the relentless pressure of day to day demands, to stand back and reflect on wider horizons.
But I hope you will allow me, with a certain sense of perspective as I approach my eightieth birthday and on my fifteenth visit here, to express my conviction that Australia in the course of my lifetime has firmly established itself amongst the most respected nations of the world.
I am clear that this country is already a key global player in the twenty-first century, a voice of wisdom and honesty, a tough and dependable operator in our exciting, fast-moving world.
Prince Harry delivers a message from The Queen at RAF Honnington 
The presentation of Colours is an opportunity to recognise historic achievements and to look forward to the future with confidence; a confidence built upon the dedication of those who have served under past colours and will serve under this colour being presented today.
I am pleased that Prince Harry is able to present a new Colour to the Royal Air Force Regiment in this, your 75th Anniversary year, on my behalf as your Air Commodore in Chief.
Next year the Royal Air Force will celebrate 100 years of defending the skies over the United Kingdom and protecting our Nation’s interests overseasHere today, every generation is represented from the graduating gunners on parade to the founder members watching on.
There are also a great many families present; their service and dedication is at the heart of The Royal Air Force Regiment's success.
The Queen’s Colour is a symbol of the trust placed in the Corps, its fighting spirit, courage and fortitude.
I am confident that the Corps’ men, and soon women, will honour all that it represents.
I give into your keeping the Queen’s Colour for the Royal Air Force Regiment.
I charge you to guard it and defend it.
National Assembly for Wales, 13 June 2002
The growth and innovation in Cardiff Bay can be seen across Wales.
Members of the National Assembly for Wales, it is my pleasure to address you on the last day of what has been a wonderful tour of Wales.
The Duke of Edinburgh and I have greatly appreciated the warmth of the welcome which we have received in the places we have visited, small and large, from Bangor to Newport.
Here in Cardiff Bay, we can see around us changes which have shaped the history of Wales.
A thousand years ago, this was a piece of marsh ground forming part of the disputed kingdom of Glamorgan, ruled over by descendants of Rhodri the Great, whose blood line runs through my family.
One hundred years ago, in the first year of my great grandfather's reign, this site was part of one of the busiest ports in the world, exporting almost 19 million tons of coal from the thriving pits of South Wales.
When I came to the throne, Cardiff's port had already begun to change.
The rise and fall of businesses due to the vagaries of supply and demand, and to changes in the use of raw materials or in technology, are never easy.
But Wales is overcoming its difficulties.
Over the last decade, a new life has been breathed into this area.
Hotels, marinas, exhibition centres, restaurants and residential and commercial properties have replaced the docks of the past.
Opposite this Assembly Building, the spectacular new Wales Millennium Centre, which will be a base for Welsh National Opera and other important cultural institutions, is being built where railway lines once ran.
The growth and innovation in Cardiff Bay can be seen across Wales.
More than 70 thousand people are now employed by overseas companies you have been able to attract here.
In this Chamber, you are yourselves building a new institution, and you are an important element in the evolving constitutions of this country.
This can be seen in the context of steady changes in the way Wales has been governed over the last 50 years.
Throughout the second part of the twentieth century there had been a growing level of administrative devolution to Wales.
The significance of the change which occurred in 1998 was that administrative devolution was replaced by a system which was to be more accountable to the electorate.
It is an example of how our system of government can adjust to new demands peacefully and democratically.
Christmas Broadcast 1999
This December we are looking back not just on one year, but on a hundred years and a thousand years.
At the end of 1999 The Queen's Christmas Broadcast looked forward to the start of a new century and a new millennium, as well as looking at the lessons of history.
The broadcast, filmed in the White Drawing Room of Windsor Castle, featured film of a reception for young achievers at the Palace of Holyroodhouse, and a reception for members of the emergency services at Buckingham Palace.
A very Happy Christmas to you all.
Listening to the choir from St. George's Chapel, Windsor, reminds me that this season of carols and Christmas trees is a time to take stock; a time to reflect on the events of the past year and to make resolutions for the new year ahead.
This December we are looking back not just on one year, but on a hundred years and a thousand years.
History is measured in centuries.
More than ever we are aware of being a tiny part of the infinite sweep of time when we move from one century and one millennium to another.
And as I look to the future I have no doubt at all that the one certainty is change - and the pace of that change will only seem to increase.
This is true for all of us - young and old.
On my mother's ninety-ninth birthday last August I was struck by how the inevitability of change affects us all, and how different were my mother's early years compared with those of my grandchildren.
For many of their generation the future is a source of excitement, hope and challenge.
For others however the future is a cause of understandable anxiety.
There are many, for example, of my age or amongst the more vulnerable in society who worry that they will be left behind.
The sheer rate of change seems to be sweeping away so much that is familiar and comforting.
But I do not think that we should be over-anxious.
We can make sense of the future - if we understand the lessons of the past.
Winston Churchill, my first Prime Minister, said that "the further backward you look, the further forward you can see".
It was this importance of history which was much on my mind when I opened the new Scottish Parliament in July this year.
Devolution in Scotland and Wales, and more recently the very welcome progress in Northern Ireland, are responses to today's changed circumstances, but they need to be seen in their historical contexts.
History and a common past have also played an important part in bringing together so many different nations into the modern Commonwealth.
This was a frequent theme last month at the Commonwealth conference in South Africa.
At that meeting many of us highlighted the way in which the varied strands of our shared history have been woven together so that we can more effectively address the challenges and opportunities ahead.
The Commonwealth, as with the process of devolution in the United Kingdom, reminds us of the importance of bringing the lessons of the past to bear on the aspirations for a better future.
To do this we need to draw from our history those constant and unchanging values which have stood the test of time and experience.
Fairness and compassion, justice and tolerance; these are the landmarks from the past which can guide us through the years ahead.
These timeless values tell us above all about the way we should relate to people rather than to things; thinking of others, not just of ourselves.
Earlier this autumn in Manchester I visited some of the emergency services, whose responsibilities day in and day out are based on concern for others.
As always they are on duty over these Christmas and New Year holidays.
Up and down the country people like those firemen, nurses and ambulancemen I met are working tirelessly to help others.
They remind us of the responsibility of each and every one of us to show concern for our neighbours and those less fortunate than ourselves.
I believe that this provides us with the direction and resolve required for the years ahead.
The future is not only about new gadgets, modern technology or the latest fashion, important as these may be.
At the centre of our lives - today and tomorrow - must be the message of caring for others, the message at the heart of Christianity and of all the great religions.
This message - love thy neighbour as thyself - may be for Christians 2,000 years old.
But it is as relevant today as it ever was.
I believe it gives us the guidance and the reassurance we need as we step over the threshold into the twenty-first century.
And I for one am looking forward to this new Millennium.
State dinner in Wellington, New Zealand, 25 February 2002
It is both a privilege and a pleasure to have served as Queen of New Zealand for these fifty years.
Tena koutou katoa.
(Please accept my greetings.)Thank you for your kind words of welcome.
I am delighted to be back here, to mark fifty years in the life of this country, and fifty years as Queen of New Zealand.
Whenever Prince Philip and I are here we particularly appreciate the warmth and friendliness of New Zealanders; the diverse culture and the stunning beauty of the country; and the opportunity to share your special way of life.
I have vivid memories of our very first visit here, from arriving on a misty morning in Auckland harbour in December 1953, to our departure from Bluff at the end of January 1954.We travelled extensively, both by train and by car, throughout the North and South Islands.
I still recall the Maori reception in Rotorua, and, with great sadness, the terrible tragedy at Tangiwai.
Those are strong memories of the past.
But I am confident that this visit will allow me to retain a real sense of the present.
Throughout the world New Zealand is known by the outstanding achievements of its people.
From such a small population has emerged a remarkably large number of leaders in their field.
Creative artists, film makers, scientists, mountaineers, innovators and sportspeople are world-renowned.
The source of so much talent is that rich mix of culture which is quintessential New Zealand.
Your communities, old and new, are exceptionally strong.
Over the last fifty years I have had the privilege to meet with Maori - the tangata whenua.
This morning in the South Island, in Christchurch, I visited Ngai Tahu.
We discussed the way in which their traditional strengths can combine with the opportunities of the 21st century.
I know the special place which the Maori have in this country.
Their contribution to this nation's story has profoundly shaped who you have become.
The creative talent and vibrancy here has also been enriched by the contribution of more recent migrants from the Pacific, Asia, and further afield.
With this strong cultural blend it is not surprising that New Zealand plays an active and significant role on the world stage.
This country has a distinguished record of supporting international peacekeeping.
The New Zealand presence in East Timor and the deployment of New Zealand support personnel in Afghanistan is further evidence of your willingness to engage with others in bringing stability to troubled areas.
Closer to home, New Zealand is committed to a strong partnership with the neighbours of the Pacific, your near neighbours, and you make a major contribution to the promotion of stability, peace and prosperity in the region.
New Zealanders are also in key positions in the World Trade Organisation, the Commonwealth Secretariat, and also now the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association.
If we contemplate this for a moment, it adds up to an extraordinary record for a country of fewer than four million people.
I hope that this Golden Jubilee year will be used as an occasion to reflect on our lives, and the broader lives of our nations; to take stock of the present and look towards the future.
This is a very different country from the one I first visited all those years ago.
The changes here over these fifty years have been dramatic; I have admired your increasing energy and confidence.
I know that this process of evolution will continue as you, the people of New Zealand, map out your path for the future in your own time and in your own way.
But there are also constants in the midst of that change, and they derive from the enduring values which seem to characterise New Zealanders: a sense of fairness and justice; a willingness to be outward-looking; a natural compassion for others; and above all an individuality of approach, which somehow has a very powerful connection with the rich diversity of this beautiful land.
These remain, in 2002, essential to the Kiwi character.
These values also explain why it is both a privilege and a pleasure to have served as Queen of New Zealand for these fifty years.
I thank you all for the loyalty and support you have given to me throughout this time.
I look forward to continuing to serve to the best of my ability in the years to come.
It fills me with great pride to stand before you here today to express my lasting respect and deep affection for this country and for New Zealanders everywhere.
The Queen's Commonwealth Day message, 14 March 2016
Being inclusive and accepting diversity goes far deeper than accepting differences at face value and being tolerant.
Wherever we live in the Commonwealth, we can always benefit from being open to the ideas and encouragement of those around us.
Each of us can also make a positive difference in the lives of others by being willing to contribute and offer support.
This is an essential ingredient of belonging to the Commonwealth: the willingness to share, to exchange and to act for the common good.
By including others, drawing on collective insights, knowledge and resources, and thinking and working together, we lay the foundations of a harmonious and progressive society.
The greater the diversity of those included in such a shared enterprise, the greater the gains.
Each of us has cause to celebrate the sense of belonging expressed in our 2016 theme: 'An Inclusive Commonwealth'.
Our recognition of this value, and the wisdom of mutual respect for each other, is set out in the Commonwealth Charter.
Its opening words, “We the people of the Commonwealth” convey the conviction that individuals, as well as governments, build and shape our success.
Being inclusive and accepting diversity goes far deeper than accepting differences at face value and being tolerantTrue celebration of the dignity of each person, and the value of their uniqueness and contribution, involves reaching out, recognising and embracing their individual identity.
At the recent Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, there were forums for women, youth, business and civil society.
These forums were a place for reflection on how to contribute collectively to achieving positive global change, for which the Commonwealth is widely respected.
Today, and in the year ahead, the theme 'An Inclusive Commonwealth' is an inspiration for us all.
Visit to Toulouse, State Visit, France, 7 April 2004
It is fitting that my visit to France should end with this impressive example of Franco-British and European co-operation.
Before I name this aircraft, let me take the opportunity to thank all at Airbus for their hospitality in receiving me today, and to congratulate everyone who works for Airbus, here or elsewhere, on their outstanding success.
It is wonderful for me to see so many British people here today with your French colleagues.
It is fitting that my visit to France should end with this impressive example of Franco-British and European co-operation.
Prince Philip and I would also like to thank President Chirac, the French government and the French people, especially the people of Paris and Toulouse, for these past three days.
The warmth of your welcome will live long in our memories.
I am now delighted, in this Entente Cordiale centenary year, to name this new Airbus for Virgin Atlantic Airways:
The Queen's Commonwealth Day Message 2021
Stirring examples of courage, commitment and selfless dedication to duty have been demonstrated in every Commonwealth nation and territory.
Over the coming week, as we celebrate the friendship, spirit of unity and achievements of the Commonwealth, we have an opportunity to reflect on a time like no other.
Whilst experiences of the last year have been different across the Commonwealth, stirring examples of courage, commitment and selfless dedication to duty have been demonstrated in every Commonwealth nation and territory, notably by those working on the front line who have been delivering health care and other public services in their communities.
We have also taken encouragement from remarkable advances in developing new vaccines and treatments.
The testing times experienced by so many have led to a deeper appreciation of the mutual support and spiritual sustenance we enjoy by being connected to others.
The need to maintain greater physical distance, or to live and work largely in isolation, has, for many people across the Commonwealth, been an unusual experience.
In our everyday lives, we have had to become more accustomed to connecting and communicating via innovative technology - which has been new to some of us - with conversations and communal gatherings, including Commonwealth meetings, conducted online, enabling people to stay in touch with friends, family, colleagues, and counterparts who they have not been able to meet in person.
Increasingly, we have found ourselves able to enjoy such communication, as it offers an immediacy that transcends boundaries or division, helping any sense of distance to disappear.
Legislative Assembly in Nunavut, Canada, 4 October 2002
I am proud to be the first member of the Canadian Royal Family to be greeted in Canada's newest territory.
Your Excellencies, Prime Minister, Honourable members, Elders, Ladies and Gentlemen,It is the greatest pleasure for Prince Philip and me to be back in Canada again for this visit to mark my Golden Jubilee.
I am particularly pleased that our first stop is Iqaluit, and that we have been able to start this tour amongst the people who made us feel so welcome eight years ago when we visited Baffin Island.
Lorsque nous sommes venus au Canada en 1951 (dix-neuf cent cinquante-et-un), le Prince Philip et moi avons pu apprécièr la sérénade des jolies cornemuses de la Nouvelle-Écosse, savourez la cuisine traditionnelle du Québec, faire de la danse carrée à Rideau Hall, avoir l'experience d'une averse aux Chutes Niagara, admirer du train le panorama des Prairies... et nous avons apprécié chaque minute de notre séjour au Canada.
But our first journey North had to wait until 1959.
It was only then that we came to know a people whose heritage - and eloquent forms of cultural expression -are rooted among the earliest sentiments of this vast and beautiful land.
Whether your saga is narrated by the great storytellers, or through history books, it is a compelling account of migration, resourcefulness, and instinct for survival.
You have created harmony with the environment - one that you regard as a gift to be cherished, not an inheritance to squander.
Your land is indeed your strength.
For the past three years, this rich expanse has been yours in its most precious sense and it bears the name you chose: that speaks of your ancestors, Canada's original citizens, one of the nation's founding cultures; that speaks of your Elders, whose lifelong struggles are part of the foundations upon which you are building a bright future for the Nunavummiut; and that speaks of your youth, to whom you entrust that future.
They are the key to increasing prosperity in the Nunavut of tomorrow.
With the values you pass on to these leaders-in-waiting, and your belief in life-long learning, many opportunities for shared success will be created, not in far-off urban centres, but at home - in the towns and cities and wide, open spaces of Nunavut.
Mesdames et messieurs, merci de vous joindre à moi pour la celebration du cinquantième anniversaire de mon règne en tant que Reine du Canada.
Au cours de ces cinq décennies, plusieurs événements mémorables ont façonné ce pays qui jouit d'un si grand respect à travers le monde.
Some I witnessed myself during my twenty-one previous visits - EXPO '67 and Canada's Centennial; the Centenary of the Northwest Territories; the '76 Olympics; the proclamation of the Constitution of Canada; and Canada's 125th Birthday.
These memories - and so many others over these fifty years - help to explain not only the admiration but the deep affection I feel for this country and for Canadians everywhere.
Prince Philip and I look forward over the next eleven days to visiting every region of the country, to travelling to familiar sites, and to others we have not seen before, to encountering old friends from earlier trips and making new ones, and at every stage renewing our links with the colourful history of this nation.
Taking its rightful place in this Canadian story has been the birth of Nunavut in 1999.
The designation of your homeland as the newest territory in Canada - and in the Commonwealth at large - is history in the making.
Prince Philip and I congratulate you for bringing your dream to reality.
I am proud to be the first member of the Canadian Royal Family to be greeted in Canada's newest territory.
I thank you for welcoming us so warmly here today on this first stop of my Canadian Jubilee tour.
The Queen's reply to Loyal Addresses by Privileged Bodies, 27 March 2012
Prince Philip and I thank you for your warm expressions of loyalty and affection, and for the dedicated service you continue to offer our nation.
It is ten years since you were last gathered here on the occasion of my Golden Jubilee.
Over the past decade, you, the Privileged Bodies and corporations of the United Kingdom have continued your important work in supporting the core values of this nation, in helping to preserve our time-honoured traditions and most importantly, in shaping its future.
Today’s ceremony, on the occasion of my Diamond Jubilee, provides an opportunity to reflect on the significant contribution your diverse organisations have made to the fabric and well-being of society.
Over the past 60 years, you have strengthened this country, boosting prosperity through innovation and development, and enriching its spiritual life.
For those bodies in the fields of education, science and the arts, you have added to our intellectual capital and enhanced our reputation for ingenuity and creativity; the Church and other religious bodies have offered a spiritual and social framework, sustained communities and helped the disadvantaged; while the civic and other bodies have provided vital services to support people in their daily lives.
All of you have worked to promote cooperation and friendship within the communities of the United Kingdom, and the wider Commonwealth community.
Today’s gathering allows us to pay tribute to the leaders of the Privileged Bodies represented here today, but also to the staff and volunteers who are the strength of these organisations.
I have enjoyed reading your Loyal Addresses which reflect the professional excellence and achievement for which you are internationally renowned.
The Queen's broadcast to the Armed Forces, 1 July 2009
 I greatly hope that the Elizabeth Cross will give further meaning to the nation’s debt of gratitude to the families and loved ones of those who have died in the service of our country.
As I talk to you today I am conscious that my words are being heard simultaneously across many time-zones, climates and terrains.
Wherever you are deployed in the world, you should be assured that I and the whole nation are deeply thankful for the part you play in helping to maintain peace around the globe.
In these present times, no less than in previous years, the men and women of our Armed Forces undertake their duties in the knowledge that danger often lies ahead.
They know that many have died in the service of our country and that difficulties are ever present.
With this in mind, the Armed Forces have recommended that for those servicemen and women who have given their lives during operations, a special emblem and scroll will be granted to their next of kin.
I am pleased to be associated with such an initiative, which is in keeping with a tradition established during the First World War.
And so I have asked that this emblem should be known as the Elizabeth Cross.
This seems to me a right and proper way of showing our enduring debt to those who are killed while actively protecting what is most dear to us all.
The solemn dignity which we attach to the names of those who have fallen is deeply engrained in our national character.
As a people, we accord this ultimate sacrifice the highest honour and respect.
Around the world Prince Philip and I have always been impressed by the way the Commonwealth War Graves Commission tends to the graves and memorials of those servicemen and women who lost their lives during the First and Second World Wars.
And now, the Armed Forces Memorial, established at the National Memorial Arboretum, bears the names of each of the British service personnel who have died on operations since that time.
The Queen's broadcast to the UK and Commonwealth
We should take comfort that while we may have more still to endure, better days will returnI am speaking to you at what I know is an increasingly challenging time.
A time of disruption in the life of our country: a disruption that has brought grief to some, financial difficulties to many, and enormous changes to the daily lives of us all.
I want to thank everyone on the NHS front line, as well as care workers and those carrying out essential roles, who selflessly continue their day-to-day duties outside the home in support of us all.
I am sure the nation will join me in assuring you that what you do is appreciated and every hour of your hard work brings us closer to a return to more normal times.
I also want to thank those of you who are staying at home, thereby helping to protect the vulnerable and sparing many families the pain already felt by those who have lost loved ones.
Together we are tackling this disease, and I want to reassure you that if we remain united and resolute, then we will overcome it.
I hope in the years to come everyone will be able to take pride in how they responded to this challenge.
And those who come after us will say that the Britons of this generation were as strong as any.
That the attributes of self-discipline, of quiet good-humoured resolve and of fellow-feeling still characterise this country.
The pride in who we are is not a part of our past, it defines our present and our future.
The moments when the United Kingdom has come together to applaud its care and essential workers will be remembered as an expression of our national spirit; and its symbol will be the rainbows drawn by children.
Across the Commonwealth and around the world, we have seen heart-warming stories of people coming together to help others, be it through delivering food parcels and medicines, checking on neighbours, or converting businesses to help the relief effort.
And though self-isolating may at times be hard, many people of all faiths, and of none, are discovering that it presents an opportunity to slow down, pause and reflect, in prayer or meditation.
It reminds me of the very first broadcast I made, in 1940, helped by my sister.
We, as children, spoke from here at Windsor to children who had been evacuated from their homes and sent away for their own safety.
Today, once again, many will feel a painful sense of separation from their loved ones.
But now, as then, we know, deep down, that it is the right thing to do.
While we have faced challenges before, this one is different.
This time we join with all nations across the globe in a common endeavour, using the great advances of science and our instinctive compassion to heal.
We will succeed - and that success will belong to every one of us.
We should take comfort that while we may have more still to endure, better days will return: we will be with our friends again; we will be with our families again; we will meet again.
State Banquet, President of Italy, 15 March 2005
We in Britain today are enthusiastic admirers of Italian culture, Italian fashion and Italian food.
I am delighted to welcome you and Signora Ciampi to London today.
Prince Philip and I recall with great pleasure the warmth of your hospitality and that of the Italian people during our three State Visits to Italy, the last in October 2000.Our two nations bear the stamp of more than two thousand years of shared history.
The greatest British writers, from Chaucer and Milton to Keats, Byron and Shelley, have drawn inspiration from the Italian literature and culture which has done so much to shape our civilisation.
Millions of British schoolchildren first encounter your country through the settings and stories of Shakespeare's plays.
Robert Browning memorably wrote that if you opened his heart, you would find 'Italy' "graved inside of it".
We in Britain today are enthusiastic admirers of Italian culture, Italian fashion and Italian food.
Our opera houses have been blessed with productions by Franco Zeffirelli; our football grounds with the talents of so many gifted Italian footballers.
Looking towards your own country, we take pride in the role British citizens have played in international efforts to save Venice; and in the generations of British archaeologists who have helped to unlock the secrets of ancient Rome.
Contemporary British architecture, music and design is I believe more popular in Italy than ever before.
The British Council this year celebrates sixty years of continuous presence in Italy, with a programme of events including a major art exhibition and visits to Italy by some of our best writers, musicians and scientists.
As two of the world's leading economies, the United Kingdom and Italy are working together to enhance global prosperity and to ensure that its benefits are shared.
Here too we have a long common history.
Lombard Street, in the City of London, testifies to the fact that it was Italian bankers in the Middle Ages who brought modern finance to this island.
Today, British companies working in Italy manufacture everything from clothes to pharmaceuticals to ice cream, while Italian companies here produce everything from helicopters to kitchen appliances.
Our investment and trade creates and sustains thousands of jobs in both our countries.
We are close partners and leading nations in the European Union.
The modern European Union was born in Italy, first at the Messina conference, then at the first Treaty of Rome in 1957.
The EU Constitutional Treaty, signed in Rome last year, is a sign of our shared commitment to Europe's future.
We are close allies in the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation, the United Nations and the G8.
And it is a characteristic of our alliance, and of our friendship, that we stand together in troubled times.
Giuseppe Mazzini, one of the architects of modern Italy, whose 200th anniversary we celebrate this year, found safety in London from persecution.
I can never forget the many young British soldiers who died in the Second World War fighting to liberate Italy from tyranny, a fight in which you, Mr. President, played a distinguished part.
Today, British and Italian armed forces are working side by side in a shared commitment to bring peace and stability to the Balkans, Afghanistan, and Iraq.
We salute those of your countrymen who have given their lives in these conflicts and we particularly share your sadness at your recent loss.
Mr.
President, our countries' histories, and our futures, are intimately linked.
Ours is an old friendship - but it has lost none of the admiration and indeed the passion which have marked it down the centuries.
Your State Visit today symbolises a relationship between the United Kingdom and Italy which has never been stronger.
We can look back together with pride; and we look forward together with optimism for the future.
Ladies and Gentlemen, I ask you all to raise your glasses to:
An address by The Queen to the National Assembly for Wales, 2007
I wish you insight, wisdom and patience as you take forward the work of this Third Assembly.
Presiding Officer, Members of the National Assembly for Wales,I am pleased to be able to return here on another important occasion for Wales, and to be able to welcome members elected to the Third National Assembly for Wales.
I would like to offer you all my warm congratulations on your election last month.
You have been entrusted with vital responsibilities by the people of Wales - to represent their interests here in this Assembly and to realise the potential of the democratic process here on their behalf.
In the months since I came here to mark the opening of this spectacular new building, there have been further notable milestones for Wales.
The Government of Wales Act 2006 opens the way to a new era for devolution, with significant changes in the way the National Assembly for Wales works.
The Welsh Assembly Government will govern, while the National Assembly for Wales will provide the necessary scrutiny and monitoring of their policies and their implementation.
Equally historic are the new powers giving the National Assembly for Wales the opportunity to make its own legislation on devolved matters such as health, education, social welfare and local government.
It is now for you to ensure that policies and legislation meet the needs and aspirations of the people of Wales more closely than ever before.
By grasping these challenges, and by promoting accountability and responsive governance, you have the potential to strengthen democracy and public engagement with decision making and to enhance the effectiveness of public institutions in Wales.
As part of this, you are leading the way in making the business of the Assembly more accessible for all, through broadcasting and information technology.
I remarked last year on the open, welcoming design of this splendid building.
Your creative use of technology complements the building perfectly.
However, it is your own approach to your role as Assembly members that will do most to enhance the reputation of the Assembly for open, modern democracy.
As we reflect on the future and the unique potential for the Assembly and for Wales, it is particularly appropriate that you have been joined here today by people from across Wales - young and old.
As Assembly Members it is right that you should reach out to all generations and that you should help the young people of Wales to develop their interest and understanding of the work of the Assembly.
Presiding Officer, Assembly Members, I wish you insight, wisdom and patience as you take forward the work of this Third Assembly.
Christmas Broadcast 1992
I first came here for Christmas as a grandchild.
Nowadays, my grandchildren come here for the same family festival.
The Queen's Christmas Broadcast in 1992 came a month after fire destroyed part of Windsor Castle.
The Queen chose to address the importance of personal fortitude, as embodied by members of the Armed Services undertaking difficult peace-keeping duties, and Leonard Cheshire, who died that year.
This year, I am speaking to you not from Buckingham Palace, but from Sandringham, where my family gathers every year for Christmas.
My great-grandfather, King Edward VII, made Sandringham his country home in 1862, and it was from this house that my grandfather, King George V, and my father, used to speak over the radio - originally to the Empire and then to the Commonwealth - on Christmas Day all those years ago.
It was from here that I made my first Christmas Broadcast forty years ago, and this year I am very glad to be able to speak to you again from this family home.
I first came here for Christmas as a grandchild.
Nowadays, my grandchildren come here for the same family festival.
To me, this continuity is a great source of comfort in a world of change, tension and violence.
The peace and tranquillity of the Norfolk countryside make me realise how fortunate we are, and all the more conscious of the trials and sorrows that so many people are suffering both in this country and around the world.
My heart goes out to those whose lives have been blighted by war, terrorism, famine, natural disaster or economic hardship.
Like many other families, we have lived through some difficult days this year.
The prayers, understanding and sympathy given to us by so many of you, in good times and bad, have lent us great support and encouragement.
It has touched me deeply that much of this has come from those of you who have troubles of your own.
As some of you may have heard me observe, it has, indeed, been a sombre year.
But Christmas is surely the right moment to try to put it behind us and to find a moment to pray for those, wherever they are, who are doing their best in all sorts of ways to make things better in 1993.I am thinking especially of the Servicemen and women, and the aid workers with them, trying to keep the peace in countries riven by strife, and to bring food to the weak and innocent victims.
They do not have an easy task and they need all the moral and practical support that we can give them.
Curiously enough, it was a sad event which did as much as anything in 1992 to help me put my own worries into perspective.
Just before he died, Leonard Cheshire came to see us with his fellow members of the Order of Merit.
By then, he was suffering from a long drawn-out and terminal illness.
He bore this with all the fortitude and cheerfulness to be expected of a holder of the Victoria Cross.
However, what struck me more forcibly than his physical courage was the fact that he made no reference to his own illness, but only to his hopes and plans to make life better for others.
He embodied the message in those well-known lines: "Kindness in another's trouble, courage in one's own".
One of his Cheshire Homes for people with disabilities is not far from this house.
I have visited others all over the Commonwealth and I have seen at first hand the remarkable results of his, and his wife's, determination to put Christ's teaching to practical effect.
Perhaps this shining example of what a human being can achieve in a lifetime of dedication can inspire in the rest of us a belief in our own capacity to help others.
Such talents and indomitable spirit are not given to all of us.
But if we can sometimes lift our eyes from our own problems, and focus on those of others, it will be at least a step in the right direction, and Christmas is a good time to take it.
I hope that his example will continue to inspire us all in the years ahead.1993 will certainly bring new challenges, but let us resolve to meet it with fresh hope in our hearts.
There is no magic formula that will transform sorrow into happiness, intolerance into compassion or war into peace, but inspiration can change human behaviour.
Those, like Leonard Cheshire, who devote their lives to others, have that inspiration and they know, and we know, where to look for help in finding it.
That help can be readily given if we only have the faith to ask.
I and my family, as we approach a new year, will draw strength from this faith in our commitment to your service in the coming years.
Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting reception, Nigeria, 3 December 2003
Nigeria has much to be proud of.
Mr.
President, Ladies and Gentlemen,Thank you for your invitation to visit Nigeria and for your kind words of welcome.
Prince Philip and I have many vivid memories of our visit here in 1956.
Although much has changed since then, the warmth of the Nigerian welcome remains a constant and we have again been touched by the generous reception we have been given.
Mr.
President, my visit is a demonstration of the value Britain attaches to its relations with Nigeria and a recognition of the role this country plays on the international stage.
The links between our two countries of course have deep historical roots, but it is also a living and expanding relationship.
Thousands of Nigerians visit the United Kingdom every year for business and pleasure.
Many are enrolled in British universities, colleges and schools.
And British citizens of Nigerian descent continue to make a valuable contribution in many areas of British life at national and local level.
The United Kingdom is well represented in Nigeria.
British investment in the economy is worth billions of pounds and more than four thousand British citizens live and work here.
The British Council is this year celebrating sixty years of helping to spread knowledge of modern British life across your country and the BBC World Service reaches many Nigerians in their homes.
My government also provides significant development support for Nigerian programmes in areas as varied as universal basic education, access to justice and the fight against HIV/AIDS.Nigeria has much to be proud of.
Your natural wealth has made it the world's sixth largest oil exporter.
You have writers and artists, international laureates, celebrated sports and music stars, and heads of international organisations.
You have built this fine new capital which this year has so successfully hosted the All Africa Games.
Abroad, you play an important role in the region and in the continent as a whole.
And, as Africa's most populous nation, Nigeria has an important voice on global issues.
My country particularly applauds the leading part the Nigerian Government and people are playing in the New Partnership for Africa's Development and the international community's efforts to bring peace and stability to Liberia, Sierra Leone and other nations wracked by conflict in West Africa.
It is fitting that Nigeria should host the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting this year.
You will know better than I that Nigeria has also suffered adversity and reverses.
So Britain and the wider international community rejoiced at Nigeria's return to democratic rule in 1999.
We also recognised the importance of the elections held earlier this year and the civilian transition that followed.
We welcome your government's plans for much-needed political, economic and judicial reform, poverty alleviation and the fight against corruption.
These are huge challenges.
I am told that a Nigerian proverb runs: "never start a journey if you have no plan to finish it".
Mr. President, it matters to the United Kingdom and to the other countries of the Commonwealth that Nigeria does not falter on the journey of development and democracy.
